8
Alternative Asset Classes
Alternative asset classes-absolute return, real assets, and private equity-contribute to the
portfolio construction process by pushing back the efficient frontier, allowing creation of
portfolios with higher returns for a given level of risk or with lower risk for a given level of
return. Investors who employ alternative assets as legitimate tools in the portfolio allocation
process reduce dependence on traditional marketable securities, facilitating the structuring of
truly diversified portfolios.
As separate asset classes, each alternative investment category adds something distinctive
and important to portfolio characteristics. Absolute return and real assets provide
diversification, generating returns driven by factors materially different from those determining
results of other asset classes. In contrast, private equity returns depend on many factors
common to the determination of marketable equity returns. Although private investments
provide little diversification, well-selected private holdings contain the potential to make a
dramatic contribution to portfolio returns.
Prices for many alternative assets lack the efficiency typical of prices for traditional
marketable securities, leading to opportunities for astute managers to add substantial value in
the investment process. In fact, investors in alternative asset classes must pursue active
management since market returns do not exist in the sense of an investable passive option. Even
if investors could purchase the median result in an alternative asset class, the results would
likely disappoint. Longer term median historical returns have lagged comparable marketable
security results, both in absolute and risk-adjusted terms. Only by generating superior active
returns do investors realize the promise of investing in alternative assets.
ABSOLUTE RETURN
Absolute return investing consists of inefficiency-exploiting marketable securities positions
that exhibit little or no correlation to traditional stock and bond investments. Well-structured
absolute return portfolios provide equity-like returns with powerful diversifying
characteristics.
situations
Absolute return managers reduce market risk by investing in event-driven or value-driven
cted to behave independently of market forces. Event-driven positions depend
on the completion of a specific corporate finance transaction such as the consummation of a
merger or the emergence of a company from bankruptcy. Value-driven strategies employ
hedged portfolios in which short positions offset long positions, dramatically reducing the
investor's systematic risk. Absolute return managers seek to generate high levels of returns,
independent of market results, in contrast to the relative benchmark-beating returns sought by
active marketable security managers.
The short duration of absolute return strategies makes the short-term cost of funds a fair
starting point for evaluating manager performance. The basic math of hedged positions implies
that (in the absence of skill and fees) investors deserve a money market rate of return.! If
managers add value, returns will exceed short-term rates. If managers fail to add value, returns
will fall short of money market rates.
Without active management, absolute return does not exist. The fundamental notion of
absolute return investing rests on identification and successful exploitation of inefficiencies in
pricing marketable securities. In the absence of value added by active managers, investors
receive money market rates of return, appropriate compensation for creating positions without
material market exposure.
Event-driven Investing
Event-driven opportunities exist because of the complexities inherent in business combinations
and corporate reorganizations. Mainstream portfolio managers recognize that the determinants
of the merger endgame and the bankruptcy resolution differ materially from the factors that
predominate in day-to-day security valuation. The legal and regulatory environment changes
upon announcement of a proposed combination or reorganization, giving the informed
specialist an advantage over the competent generalist. Superior analytical skills create a
meaningful edge for active event-driven investors.
The opportunity exploited by event-driven investors stems in part from sales of securities by
investors unwilling to commit the resources to develop a thorough understanding of the
circumstances surrounding complex corporate finance transactions. In the case of distressed
securities, selling pressure comes from investors unable or unwilling to hold securities of failing
or failed companies. The sometimes massive supply of securities from holders uncomfortable
with positions in companies undergoing basic structural change allows event-driven investors
to establish positions with attractive embedded returns.
Merger arbitrage represents a typical event-driven absolute return strategy, with results
related to the manager's ability to predict the probability that a deal will close, the likely timing
and the expected consideration for the transaction. Upon announcement of a stock-for-stock
deal, the price of the target company's stock generally rises to a level somewhat below the
acquirer's offer, creating an opportunity for the merger arbitrageur to profit. Uncertainty
regarding the ultimate outcome of the transaction causes many holders to sell, motivated by
the concern that gains stimulated by the merger offer might disappear for any of a number of
reasons. After careful assessment of deal-specific factors, merger arbitrage investors buy the
stock of the target company and sell shares of the acquiring company, hoping to profit from the
elimination of the spread when the transaction closes. Because the arbitrageur holds long
positions offset by short positions, the direction of the overall market plays little role in
determining the position's returns. Instead, results depend on the merger arbitrageur's ability
to assess correctly the factors relevant to the ultimate conclusion of the transaction.
Newell Rubbermaid Merger Arbitrage
The March 1999 combination of Newell and Rubbermaid illustrates some of the market
dynamics underpinning event-driven investment opportunities. After the October 1998
announcement of the proposed merger, Rubbermaid shares responded by rising nearly 25
percent as shown in Figure 8.1. Trading volumes increased more than ten-fold, from an average
of 566,000 shares per day in the week prior to the announcement to 5,960,000 shares per day
in the week following. Taking advantage of the merger induced price rise, traditional long-only
investors exited the stock and created an opportunity for merger arbitrageurs to establish
positions.
The terms of the definitive agreement called for a tax-free exchange of shares in which
holders of Rubbermaid would receive 0.7883 shares of Newell upon closing, expected in early
1999. By buying a share of Rubbermaid at the post announcement price of $31.81 and selling
0.7883 of a share of Newell at $43.25, arbitrageurs generated net proceeds of $2.28 per share. If
the companies were to complete the transaction on the originally proposed terms, arbitrageurs
would have equivalent valuc positions at the closing. Upon consummation of the deal, merger
arbitrageurs would close out positions by delivering Newell shares received from the
Rubbermaid exchange to cover the original Newell short sale.
Figure 8.1 Merger Arbitrage Spread Narrows as Closing Date Nears
Merger Between Newell and Rubbermaid October 12, 1998-March 15, 1999
11e
Back-of-the-envelope calculations illustrate the return characteristics of the transaction.
When the deal closed on March 24, 1999, merger arbitrageurs earned the $2.28 post
announcement spread between the two stocks and a short rebate of about $0.57 for a total of
approximately $2.85. Cash flow yield played essentially no role in the return calculation since
the dividends earned on the Rubbermaid shares offset the dividends paid on the Newell shares.
Based on an initial capital commitment of $31.81 per share, the position delivered a gross
return of about 9 percent over a five month period, equivalent to an annualized return in the
low 20 percent range.1
The Newell Rubbermaid combination proceeded without a hitch, as the spread between
Rubbermaid and Newell shares narrowed week-by-weck until the scheduled closing. Not all
merger arbitrage transactions proceed as smoothly. The September 1998 combination of
World Com and MCI Communications began in November 1996 as a proposal by British
Telecommunications plc to acquire MCI in the largest cross border transaction ever. Between
the initiation of merger discussions and the ultimate resolution, merger arbitrageurs wrestled
with a laundry list of problems, including antitrust concerns, regulatory approvals, changes in
company business strategy, corporate operating difficulties, international political issues, and
competition from competing bidders." Regardless of whether deals take a simple path from
inception to resolution or follow a convoluted route, the returns to merger arbitrage investors
depend far more on the specific event than on the general direction of the market.
...
In the distressed securities area, event-driven investors look for opportunity in securities of
companies undergoing reorganization. Because of the complexity of the issues surrounding
bankruptcy, many market participants sell positions regardless of price, creating an
opportunity for hard working investors to profit. By assessing the timing of the company's
emergence from bankruptcy and valuing the expected package of securities, players in the
distressed securities arena generate returns more dependent on events important to the
bankruptcy process than on the level of the overall stock market.
Event-driven strategies lack the power to insulate investors completely from financial
market moves. In the case of merger arbitrage, factors influencing the stock market or the
financing market may alter the likelihood either that a particular merger will be completed or
that mergers in general will move forward, causing a commonality of influence. In the case of
distressed investing, to the extent that investors receive equity interests as part of a package of
securities distributed upon a company's reorganization, the market exerts direct influence on
the ultimate return to a distressed securities investment. In spite of identifiable links between
event-driven investing and market moves, under a wide range of circumstances event-driven
strategies provide meaningful portfolio diversification.
In times of financial crisis, the correlation between event-driven strategies and market
activity increases to uncomfortable levels. During the stock market crash in October 1987,
merger arbitrage positions fell in step with the general market, providing little protection in the
short run against the dramatic market decline. As time passed, investors recognized that
companies continued to meet contractual obligations, ultimately completing all merger deals
previously announced. The return of confidence improved merger arbitrage results, providing
handsome returns relative to the market.
Results of two prominent merger arbitrage firms, which later formed the base for Yale's
absolute return portfolio, illustrate the importance of evaluating performance over reasonable
time horizons. Pursuing the conservative approach of investing only in announced deals, the
two firms reported combined results of -17.9 percent for the fourth quarter of 1987, somewhat
ahead of the S&P 500 return of -22.5 percent but well behind expectations for event-driven
strategies. Even though no merger deals "broke," the market turmoil caused investors to
demand higher compensation for merger arbitrage risk, resulting in a dramatic widening of
spreads. In the first quarter of 1988 the arbitrage managers rebounded, posting results of 16.3
percent, far ahead of the S&P 500 returns of 5.7 percent. Viewed in isolation, the last quarter
of 1987 provided disappointing double digit losses coincident with the stock market crash,
failing to protect the portfolio during the period of crisis. Viewed as a package, the fourth
quarter of 1987 with the worst results ever for both firms and the first quarter of 1988 with the
best results ever for both firms, essentially preserved assets and provided meaningful
diversification relative to the equity market's losses.
Not all periods of financial trauma end as happily as the aftermath of the crash of October
1987. In August 2007, an extraordinary credit crisis called into question the viability of an
estimated $400 billion of merger-related financing. As a result, prospective returns on the First
Data and TXU merger arbitrage deals skyrocketed from low double digit levels in June 2007 to
more than 70 percent in mid-August 2007. Both First Data and TXU closed, providing
handsome returns to intrepid investors who made late summer bets on the deals. In contrast to
the 1987 experience, however, a number of 2007 vintage deals failed to close. The link,
however unusual, between markets and merger deals lessens the diversifying power of merger
arbitrage. That said, even though diversifying financial assets, including absolute return
strategies, may show high correlation to marketable securities for short time periods, over
reasonable investment horizons assets driven by fundamentally different factors produce
fundamentally different patterns of returns.
Because event-driven investors strive to hit singles and doubles, creating a broadly diversified
portfolio makes sense. In an environment without huge potential winners to offset inevitable
costly mistakes, careful investors limit the costs that any one position might impose on the
portfolio.
Event-driven portfolios benefit from engaging managers with a broad set of investment
tools. Hiring a specialist focused only on one aspect of the business, say merger arbitrage, forces
investors to ride a return rollercoaster. When opportunities abound, investors reap attractive
returns from the niche strategy. If high returns attract capital to the activity, or if the supply of
investment opportunities wanes, specialized investors continue to commit funds to their sole
area of expertise, ultimately reaping poor returns from funds invested at inopportune times.
In contrast, if a manager develops expertise in more than one event-driven strategy, when
returns appear sparse in one segment funds flow natura more attractive segments. The
ability to target areas of relative opportunity dampens the inevitable fluctuations experienced
by focused funds and creates the possibility of structuring higher return, lower risk portfolios.
Value-Driven Investing
Value-driven absolute return strategies rest on the manager's ability to identify undervalued
and overvalued securities, establish positions, and reduce market exposure through hedging
activity. If an investor purchases a portfolio of attractively priced stocks and sells short an
equivalent amount of expensively priced stocks, the offsetting long and short positions
eliminate systematic exposure to the equity market. Results depend entirely on stock-picking
ability, with the long/short investor enjoying the opportunity to add value with both long ideas
and short ideas. Skillful value-driven managers win on both sides of the portfolio.
While value-driven and event-driven strategies share a lack of correlation with traditional
marketable securities, value-driven portfolios require a longer time horizon than do event-
driven portfolios. Expected holding periods for merger arbitrage and distressed securities
correspond to the anticipated date of corporate combination or bankruptcy resolution,
implying a reasonably short duration for event-driven strategies. In contrast, value-driven
positions lack the clear triggers present in event-driven investing. To the consternation of fund
managers, undervalued stocks frequently decline, while overvalued positions often risc, leading
to poor near-term performance relative to expectations. Even without adverse price moves in
the short run, mispricings identified by long/short investors may take years to resolve.
Value-driven managers share much in common with active managers of traditional
marketable securities. On the long side, concentrated portfolios of thoroughly researched
securities provide the underpinnings for investment success. On the short side, the same
bottom-up techniques of fundamental analysis used to evaluate long positions provide the
basis for identifying overvalued securities. Adding the flexibility to exploit overvalued positions
-through short sales-doubles the opportunity for a manager to add value. While short
selling shares a common foundation with long investing, a successful short portfolio represents
more than a richly priced inverse of a long portfolio.
Short Selling Challenges
Management of the short side of the portfolio poses several challenges peculiar to selling
securities short. First, investors frequently underestimate the resilience of corporate
management. Even when the facts and figures indicate that a company deserves classification as
one of the "living dead," managers frequently find a way to escape the seemingly inevitable
consequences of their circumstances. Second, the portfolio management implications of
adverse price movements require greater diversification of short positions. If a stock moves
against a short seller by increasing in price, the position increases in size. To take advantage of
the now more attractively priced short opportunity the investor faces the uncomfortable
prospect of further increasing the position. Starting with a modest allocation to a particular
short idea allows an increase in position size without creating an uncomfortable concentration
in a single stock. Contrast the dynamics of a losing short position with the behavior of a losing
long position. As the long's price declines it becomes a smaller portion of the portfolio,
reducing its impact on returns and facilitating new purchases at the newly discounted,
relatively more attractive price. The simple math of price behavior argues for running
reasonably diversified portfolios of short positions. Short sellers face challenges from success, as
well as from failure. When the stock price of a fundamentally troubled company crashes, the
short seller benefits, but the size of the short position declines dramatically, requiring
identification of attractive replacement candidates. While long managers often run with
successful investments for years, short managers hope to operate on a treadmill, with frequent
turnover of holdings caused by the exit of winning positions from the portfolio. The price
dynamics of short selling cause successful short managers to follow and hold a large number of
securities.
Aside from a peculiar set of investment challenges, short sellers face some unusual technical
problems in managing portfolio positions. To execute trades, short sellers borrow securities to
deliver to the buyer on the other side of the transaction. (Buyers purchasing shares, whether
from a short seller or a natural seller, expect to receive securities on the trade's settlement date.)
As long as short sellers maintain the borrow, the position remains intact. If the short seller loses
the borrow because the security lender recalls the security, the short seller must replace the
borrow or lose the position. When the market for borrowing a particular security becomes
tight, short sellers face a short squeeze. Security borrowers tend to have most trouble with
small, less liquid companies, exactly the type of security likely to present interesting short
opportunities.
The unusual set of problems confronting short sellers places an effective limit on portfolio
size, forcing managers to constrain the level of assets under management. A reasonable
portfolio size constitutes a necessary precondition for the potential to add value, as excessive
levels of assets amount to a nearly insurmountable barrier to success. Even though the
aggressive assumption that value-driven managers might outperform the market by as much as
several percentage points cach on the long and short sides seems to fly in the face of traditional
active manager experience, limits on portfolio size provide hope for significant outperformance
by long/short managers.
Return Expectations
Hedge fund managers who attempt to produce truly independent returns generally articulate
reasonably modest goals. Consider a fund manager with a portfolio consisting of equal
measures of long positions and short positions. From a market perspective, the longs offset the
shorts. In a rising market, losses from the shorts offset gains from the longs. In a falling market,
losses from the longs offset gains from the shorts. Balanced long/short investing takes the
market out of the equation.
Security selection represents the primary source of return for disciplined long/short
investors. To the extent that managers identify undervalued long positions and overvalued
short positions, the portfolio stands to benefit from twice the security selection power available
to long-only managers.
A secondary source of returns for long/short managers comes from the rebate earned from
establishing short positions. Short sales generate cash proceeds that carn close to a money-
market rate of interest. While the short rebate adds to the return of the long/short investor, a
short rebate proves insufficient in and of itself to justify pursuing a long/short investment
strategy. If an investor wishes to earn a money-market return, buying a money-market fund
provides a more direct, less costly, and less risky route to generating cash returns.
Suppose long/short fund managers exhibit security selection skill consistent with top-
quartile, long-only domestic equity managers. For the ten years ending December 31, 2006,
one widely used universe of active managers showed top quartile returns of 2.6 percent per
annum above the market. If a long/short manager produces top quartile results on each of
the long and short sides of the portfolio, security selection generates a return of 5.2 percent.
The expected magnitude of gains available from astute security selection falls far short of
double digits.
Adding a short-term interest rate (reflecting the short rebate) to the value added from
security selection produces the gross return for long/short investing. Over the ten years ending
December 31, 2006, short-term interest rates averaged 3.7 percent per annum. Combining the
top-quartile security selection return of 5.2 percent with the money-market return yields a
total return of 8.9 percent, before fees.
Fees create a substantial burden for hedge fund investors. A management fee of one percent
and a profits interest of 20 percent combine to subtract 2.6 percent from the gross return,
leaving a net return of 6.3 percent for the investor.IV Even with substantial active management
success (as defined by two top-quartile results), net returns to long/short hedge fund investors
show only a modest increment over money-market rates.
In cases where long/short managers exhibit mediocre stock picking skill, results disappoint.
Consider the results of the median equity manager. For the ten years ending December 31,
2006, the median active domestic equity manager produced gross returns of 1.1 percent per
annum above the market return. Doubling the median active management return produces a
2.2 percent return for security selection. Incorporating the cash return of 3.7 percent generates
a gross return of 5.9 percent. The fee burden shaves the net return to 3.9 percent, a result
disturbingly close to the 3.7 percent return of simply holding cash!
Finally, contemplate the poor position of an underperforming manager. Over the ten years
ending December 31, 2006, third-quartile managers underperformed the market by 0.1
percent before fees. With an active management deficit, long/short investors earned 3.5
percent, which falls short of the return for holding cash. Fees take the gross return to a 2.0
percent net result, bringing the misery of below-cash returns to investors suffering the
consequences of poor active management.
Even though average and below-average investment results sting investors, the investment
manager makes out nicely in all cases. Regardless of performance, the manager collects a one
percent fee, representing more-or-less standard compensation for traditional long-only money
management. Adding the profits interest allows the skillful top-quartile manager to earn 2.6
percent, a hefty load on a single-digit return. Total fees for median stock pickers amount to 2.0
percent. Even in instances where net returns to investors fail to reach the returns available on
cash, the manager profits handsomely. Fees for third-quartile performers total 1.5 percent,
adding the insult of excessive fees to the injury of poor performance.
The example of balanced long/short cquity management provides a powerful illustration of
the central role that active management plays in absolute return investing. In the absence of
superior active results, investors face certain disappointment. Long/short equity managers
must consistently produce better than top-quartile returns to justify the fee structure accepted
by hedge fund investors. Investors unable to identify the best of the best should pursue passive
investment strategies.
Yale's absolute return portfolio provides an example of the potential of the asset class and
conforms to the expectations generated by considering the fundamental investment attributes
of absolute return strategies. Established as a separate asset class in 1990, the pioneering
portfolio produced 13.2 percent per annum returns for the seventeen years ending June 30,
2007. With a remarkably low risk level of 5.7 percent standard deviation of returns, the
risk/reward relationship indicates that managers exploited some rewarding market anomalies. V
The absolute return portfolio's diversifying power exceeded expectations, showing essentially
no correlation to domestic equities (0.02 vs. the Wilshire 5000 Index) and domestic fixed
income (0.02 vs. the Lehman Brothers Government Corporate Index).
Survivorship Bias and Backfill Bias
Like other alternative assets, absolute return investments lack an investable benchmark, forcing
investors to look elsewhere for defining characteristics of the asset class. Because of absolute
return's limited institutional history, understanding its quantitative attributes proves more
difficult than understanding those of real estate, leveraged buy-outs, and venture capital.
Students of more longstanding alternative investment approaches enjoy the benefit of more
than three decades of data on active manager results that describe the experience of
institutional investors and provide intriguing clues about the character of fund performance.
The paucity of data regarding absolute return strategies requires investors to seek alternative
methods for estimating asset class attributes.
Survivorship bias and backfill bias present a serious problem for investors in marketable
securities. Liquidity facilitates the hiring and firing of stock and bond managers, leading to
churning in the population of active managers. Poor performers leave (survivorship bias) and
strong firms enter (backfill bias), constantly altering the character of the standards implicit in
the collection of returns used for assessing active managers.
Manager churn presents less of a problem for investors in illiquid assets. Managers of private
assets taint the data pool with considerably less frequency than their marketable security
counterparts. Institutions tend to select real estate, venture capital, and leveraged buyout funds
from a reasonably well-defined list of acceptable alternatives, leading to a fairly coherent
definition of any given year's institutional cohort. The partnership vehicles through which
investors conduct most private investing preclude easy departure from the business. Private
investing results-good, bad, or indifferent-play out over the term of the partnership
regardless of the degree of confidence investors express in the fund managers.
Absolute return suffers from particularly acute forms of survivorship bias and backfill bias,
related to the combination of fairly high liquidity and relative immaturity. As large numbers of
new (and not-so-new) entrants fail, the firms and their mediocre records disappear. Immaturity
suggests a substantial amount of flux, as managers posting attractive risk-adjusted returns enter
the realm of institutional acceptability, adding sometimes eye-popping records to the store of
absolute return information. Liquidity allows easy entry and exit, creating instability beneath
the surface of the pool used to evaluate manager returns.
Statistics on past performance of hedge funds fail to provide much insight into the
character of this relatively new segment of the investment world. Survivorship bias presents a
pervasive problem for gatherers of historical return data. The fact that poorly performing firms
fail at higher rates than well-performing firms causes data on manager returns to overstate past
results, since compilations of data at any point in time from the current group of managers
inevitably lack complete performance numbers from firms that failed in the past. In the well-
established, comprehensively documented world of traditional marketable securities,
survivorship bias presents a significant, albeit quantifiable problem. In the less-well-established,
less comprehensively documented arena of hedge fund investing, survivorship bias creates a
much more substantial informational challenge.
Even when database managers attempt to include results from failed firms, the history of
returns often lacks completeness. Because most compilers of data rely on self-reporting of
results by hedge funds, the integrity of the history depends on the fidelity of the hedge funds.
As struggling hedge funds fight to stay in business, reporting of results to third-party database
providers takes a back burner to the day-to-day challenges of crisis management.
Consider the record of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), the infamous hedge
fund that nearly brought down the world's financial system. According to the New York Times,
the database of Tremont Capital Management, a leading purveyor of hedge fund data, contains
LTCM's performance only through October 1997, nearly a year prior to the firm's collapse.
Inception-to-date-of-reporting-cessation performance (March 1994 through October 1997)
for LTCM stood at 32.4 percent per year net to investors, representing an impressive return on
a large amount of capital. Obviously, Long-Term Capital's early record inflated the hedge fund
industry's aggregate results. From the point in October 1997 when Long-Term Capital
stopped reporting results to the point of the firm's October 1998 demise, returns (if they can
be called returns) amounted to -91.8 percent. The staggering loss appears nowhere in
Tremont's treasure trove of data.
The yawning chasm between Tremont's reported 32.4 percent per annum and LTCM's
actual -27.0 percent per annum produces a staggering gap between perception and reality. The
statistical omission of the implosion of LTCM inflates history in a manner that fundamentally
misleads investors regarding the true character of hedge fund investing.
Statistical descriptions of hedge fund returns frequently suffer not only from survivorship
bias, but also from backfill bias. As hedge funds became popular in the 1990s, only those funds
with successful track records rose above the fray, attracting attention from market observers
and money from investors. Funds with mediocre records languished in obscurity. Funds with
strong returns garnered assets and acclaim, entering the consultants' manager universes and
generating a substantial positive spin on the reported returns. In many instances, the keepers of
the numbers added the past results of newly found strong performers to the ranks of the
reporting managers, providing an unrepresentative boost to past performance data. Backfill
bias causes data on hedge fund performance to overstate the realities of the hedge fund
marketplace.
Academic studies that analyze the impact of survivorship bias and backfill bias come to
some stunning conclusions. In a study of 3,500 hedge funds over more than ten years, Roger
Ibbotson of the Yale School of Management concluded that survivorship bias added 2.9
percent annually to returns and backfill bias added an additional 4.6 percent annually to
returns.2 In aggregate, data-gathering errors inflated reported returns by fully 7.5 percent per
annum, an enormous increment in a world where the difference between success and failure
often depends on a few tenths of a percentage point. Burton Malkiel of Princeton University,
in examining a well-known database, observed that of 331 hedge funds that reported results in
1996, more than 75 percent disappeared by 2004.3 As expected, the returns of the live funds
exceeded the returns of the dead funds. Perhaps not so expected was the 7.4 percent annual
return differential between the two groups of funds. For the eight-year period, Malkiel
estimates survivorship bias inflated returns by an average of 4.4 percent per annum and backfill
bias boosted results by an average of 7.3 percent per annum. Ibbotson and Malkicl's studies call
into question the usefulness of hedge fund databases. Survivorship bias and backfill bias
matter.
Hedge Funds with Market-Related Risk
Consider two broad categories of hedge funds-those that avoid market risk and those that
accept market risk. In cases where funds steer clear of market risk, investors without skill
deserve to earn only money-market levels of return. The argument that supports a cash-like
return for investors who do not accept market risk depends on the line of reasoning
underpinning the analysis of long/short manager returns: those hedge fund strategies that do
not expose assets to systematic market risk depend solely on strong active results to achieve
gross results in excess of cash returns.
Many hedge fund strategies expose assets to various types of systematic risk. In fact,
Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch cach created and marketed synthetic hedge funds to mimic
the systematic risk components of the hedge fund world. Merrill Lynch's Factor Index, which
employs the S&P 500, Russell 2000, MSCI Emerging Markets, U.S. Dollar Index, and One-
Month LIBOR, weights each of the components to produce returns similar to those of the
Hedge Fund Research Weighted Composite Index (HFRI). Merrill Lynch touts the strong
relationship between the Factor Index and HFRI, noting a 95 percent correlation between
June 2003 and June 2006. In marketing materials, the investment bank suggests that the Factor
Index produces hedge fund exposure "in a less expensive, more transparent and more liquid
manner."
The notion of a passive hedge fund investment turns logic on its head. Hedge funds rest on
the premise of hedging, or offsetting, market exposure. The idea that hedge fund returns could
be explained and replicated by a collection of passive market indices suggests that managers are
not doing their job and that investors are being sold a bill of goods. If investors really want to
vary exposure to Merrill Lynch's Factor Index components, they should simply alter their
allocations to the S&P 500, Russell 2000, et al. The oxymoron of passive hedge fund exposure
belongs in no serious investor's portfolio.
Perhaps the most blatant example of hedge fund exposure to market forces lies in the long-
only manager that simply establishes a private partnership, calls it a hedge fund, and charges a
20 percent profits interest. In such situations, the manager receives 20 percent of the market's
return, an egregiously high fee for a factor over which the manager exerts no control. Fair fee
structures reward managers for adding value by manipulating variables under the managers'
control. In the case of a fully invested, long-only equity fund, a manager might be reasonably
rewarded with 20 percent of the incremental return over an appropriate market benchmark,
such as the S&P 500 for a large-capitalization domestic equity manager or EAFE for a foreign-
stock specialist. In situations where managers receive a portion of gains over and above a fair
benchmark, the managers receive a reward for adding value. Unfortunately, hedge fund
structures almost universally pay managers a share of the profits after returning capital,
equivalent to no hurdle at all. Without a market-sensitive hurdle rate, managers receive a
percentage of the gains generated by market exposure. The substantial toll imposed by typical
hedge fund fee structures causes the overwhelming number of hedge funds to fail to serve
investor interests.
Evaluating the returns of market-sensitive hedge funds poses nearly insurmountable
problems, challenging to even the most sophisticated of investors. Separating the impact of the
wind at the back (or the wind in the face) contributed by market forces from the influence of
the skill (or lack thereof) exhibited in security selection proves incredibly difficult, particularly
in instances where the manager invests in a broad range of markets and frequently adjusts
market exposure. Regardless of the insight garnered by investors investigating market-sensitive
hedge funds, the investment manager with an industry-standard deal structure receives a share
of the returns generated by market action, representing unreasonable compensation for gains
over which the manager exercises no control.
Absolute Return and Inflation
Since short duration characterizes absolute return investments, well-structured absolute return
portfolios exhibit high sensitivity to the short-term cost of money. In event-driven merger
arbitrage and distressed security transactions, investors generally expect resolution within
months, with longer term deals extending to no more than a year or two. Since event-driven
investors factor the cost of funds into the investment equation, as investors enter new deals the
calculations reflect the then-current cost of funds. Similarly, the short rebate earned by the
value-driven long/short investor represents a short-term cost of money. Just as money market
rates tend to track inflation rates, so does the short-duration, cost-of-funds-sensitive absolute
return portfolio.
Alignment of Interests
The profits interest typically paid by investors in hedge fund structures creates an option for
managers that threatens investor interests. In the event of hedge fund gains, the manager shares
in a substantial portion of profits. In the event of hedge fund losses, the investor bears the
burden alone. The asymmetry of the profits-interest structure clearly favors the fund manager.
Significant co-investment on the part of the manager works to reduce, if not climinate, the
dysfunction of the incentive-compensation option. In the case where the hedge fund
experiences good performance, the manager reaps rewards both from the co-investment and
from the profits interest. In the case where the fund loses money, the manager's co-investment
causes a sharing of the investor's pain. A meaningful side-by-side commitment of investment
manager capital substantially reduces the misalignment of manager and investor interests.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the hedge fund industry contained an estimated 12,500 firms,
controlling more than $1.5 trillion in equity capital.5 Moreover, because many hedge funds
employ significant leverage, their actual buying power exceeds their equity capital. Of the $1.5
trillion in capital, approximately $880 billion in assets pursue strategies that might be classified
as absolute return.
Summary
Absolute return strategies require active management, since without accepting market risk or
identifying security mispricings investors expect to earn only the risk-free rate. Since the very
definition of absolute return rests on lack of correlation with traditional marketable securities,
exploitation of individual security valuation anomalies forms the basis of the asset class. Event-
driven managers generate returns by conducting thorough research in complex corners of the
investment opportunity set, an area often avoided by mainstream analysts. Value-driven
managers attempt to add value by identifying undervalued and overvalued securities, creating
portfolios with roughly offsetting long and short market exposures. Well-managed absolute
return portfolios provide a high return, low risk source of diversification.
Absolute return investing appeals to investors who believe that providing funds to superior
managers operating with few constraints will lead to impressive investment results regardless of
the upswings and downswings of traditional marketable securities. Indeed, the experience of a
number of sophisticated institutional investors indicates that well-structured absolute return
portfolios produce high, uncorrelated returns with low risk, adding an extremely valuable
diversifying stream of returns to investor portfolios. Of course, successful absolute return
investors devote an extraordinary amount of resources to identifying, engaging, and managing
high quaility managers.
Purveyors of hedge fund statistics paint a rosy picture wildly at odds with reality. Academic
studies show that survivorship bias and backfill bias combine to inflate reported returns by
anywhere from high single digits to low double digits. A clear view of hedge fund returns
would discourage many thoughtful investors from entering the hedge fund arena.
On top of the enormous difficulties in identifying a group of genuinely skilled investment
managers and overcoming the obstacle of extremely rich fee arrangements, investors confront a
fundamental misalignment of interests created by the option-like payoff embedded in most
hedge fund fee arrangements. Investors find coincidence of interests only in those situations
where the absolute return manager invests substantial personal assets side-by-side with investor
monics.
Casual approaches to fund selection lead to almost certain disappointment. Absolute
return investing belongs in the domain of sophisticated investors who commit significant
resources to the manager evaluation process. While the promise of hedge funds proves
attractive to many market participants, those investors who fail to identify truly superior active
managers face a dismal reality. In the absence of superior security selection, investment
strategies that avoid market exposure deliver money-market-like expected returns. The hefty fee
arrangements typical of absolute return funds crode the already low cash-like return to a truly
unacceptable level, especially after adjusting for risk. Absolute return investors find generating
risk-adjusted excess returns a daunting task.
REAL ASSETS
Real assets consist of ownership interests in investment vehicles that exhibit a high correlation
to inflation. Many investors, including educational endowments, seck protection against
inflation in order to offset inflation-sensitive liabilities. Real assets include Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities, real estate, timber, and oil and gas.
The strength of inflation protection varies with the type of real asset. Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities (TIPS, also known as Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities) track inflation
precisely, at least as the Consumer Price Index measures inflation. Oil and gas reserves change
in value in direct response to changes in energy prices, which represent a substantial
component of broad inflation gauges. Timber products bear a similar relationship to price
indices, although timber plays a far less important role than does energy in overall price
inflation. Real estate holdings correlate with inflation less directly than primary inputs like
energy and timber, although when property markets operate in equilibrium a strong link exists
between real estate and inflation.
Aside from protecting portfolios against inflation, real assets produce high levels of current
cash flow and (in most cases) attractive expected total returns. Unlike commodity indices,
which give investors simple price exposure, well-chosen and well-structured real assets
investments provide price exposure plus an intrinsic rate of return. For example, oil and gas
reserve purchases in the past two decades generated low double-digit rates of return above and
beyond the return from holding period increases in energy prices. Price exposure plus an
intrinsic rate of return trumps price exposure alone.
In the future, the population of real assets alternatives might expand beyond the
conservative investments of TIPS and the high-return alternatives of real estate, oil and gas, and
timber. Pure commodity price exposure holds little interest to sensible investors, as long-term
returns approximately equal inflation rates. TIPS provide inflation-like returns with
substantially less risk than commodity investments. Oil and gas reserve purchases and timber
investments provide investors with commodity price exposure and an intrinsic rate of return,
thereby dominating price exposure alone. If markets provide other commodity-based
opportunities to gain price exposure and to earn an intrinsic rate of return, then those assets
could join the rank of sensible real assets alternatives.
Real assets play an important role in portfolios, particularly for investors who seek to satisfy
inflation-sensitive liabilities. The diversifying power derived from correlation with inflation
and the intrinsic rate of return generated above simple price exposure argues for a significant
allocation to real assets.
Inflation-Linked Bonds
In January 1997, the U.S. Treasury began issuing TIPS, creating an important new tool for
U.S.-dollar-based investors. TIPS protect investors from increases in the general level of prices
by adjusting the principal amount of the security for inflation. Since the fixed coupon rate on
TIPS applies to the inflation-adjusted principal of the bonds, both interest and principal
payments reflect changes in inflation rates.
The combination of extraordinary credit quality and precise protection against inflation
causes TIPS to produce modest real returns. During the period that Lehman Brothers tracked
TIPS' real yields, inflation adjusted returns ranged from 1.3 percent to 2.5 percent, averaging
1.9 percent. VI Investors pay a high price in the form of low expected returns from the double-
barreled conservatism of TIPS.
Just as standard U.S. Treasury bonds provide a riskless instrument for investors wishing to
generate certain nominal returns, TIPS provide a riskless instrument for investors wishing to
generate certain real returns. Based on commonality of issuer, default-free status, and structural
similarities in payment of interest and principal, many market observers group standard U.S.
Treasury bonds with TIPS. In fact, when the U.S. Treasury began issuing TIPS, Lehman
Brothers, architect of the most widely used debt market indices, placed TIPS in a cohort that
included regular-issue Treasury bonds.
The error of grouping regular Treasuries with TIPS lies in the fundamentally different
response of the two types of bonds to unanticipated changes in the p level. Unanticipated
inflation harms regular bonds by reducing the purchasing power of the fixed stream of
payments. In contrast, unanticipated inflation benefits TIPS in the form of higher returns as
payments adjust for increases in the price level. Unexpected deflation helps regular bonds by
increasing the purchasing power of the fixed stream of payments. In contrast, unexpected
deflation hurts TIPS by reducing the stream of periodic interest payments, even though
deflation fails to reduce the final principal payment. TIPS, far from belonging with standard
bonds, belong in the real assets category.
A comparison of a traditional U.S. Treasury note and a TIPS security illustrates critical
differences in the two instruments. Consider the U.S. Treasury 4.25 percent Note duc January
15, 2011 and the U.S. Treasury Inflation-Indexed Security 3.5 percent Note duc January 15,
2011. At year-end 2006, the straight bond and the inflation-protected bond boasted yields to
maturity of 4.7 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively. Because the bonds share identical credit
characteristics and identical maturity dates, the difference in yields stems solely from inflation
expectations. The 2.3 percent difference between the straight bond yield and the inflation-
protected bond yield represents the market's best estimate of inflation over the bonds' term. If
inflation exceeds 2.3 percent, the TIPS holder wins. If inflation falls short of 2.3 percent, the
straight bond owner wins.
At maturity, TIPS investors receive a possible bonus, as the bonds pay the greater of the
inflation-adjusted principal or the original face value. In a deflationary world, investors benefit
from the payment of the nondiscounted par amount of the bonds. In an environment of
general price inflation, the right to receive par for the TIPS at maturity carries the greatest valuc
at the time of issuance. In concert with price increases, the indexed value of the bond's
principal increases, creating a surplus over the par value of the bond. Were deflationary
conditions to develop, the accumulated surplus would deplete before the par protection kicked
in. Investors wishing to enjoy the maximum protection of the par put constantly roll holdings
of TIPS into the most recently issued securities.
Some foreign governments issue inflation-protected securities. As with standard bond
issues, U.S.-domiciled investors approach nonU.S. Treasury debt with caution. The United
Kingdom, Canada, Sweden, France, Italy, Germany, Greece, Japan, Australia, and New
Zealand boast substantial programs of inflation-indexed bond issuance. Because foreign
government bonds generally make payments in the currency of the realm, U.S. investors face
foreign exchange risk. The combination of divergent future domestic and foreign inflation
rates and unknown future foreign exchange translations serve to render non-U.S. government
inflation-indexed bonds useless as a hedge against U.S. inflation.
U.S. corporate issuance of inflation-protected securities poses a different set of issues. As is
the case with straight corporate debt, inflation-indexed corporate securities generally suffer
from credit risk, illiquidity, and unattractive call provisions. In addition, investors might
consider the implications of holding corporate inflation-protected securities in a high-inflation
environment. Just when the protection against price increases proves most valuable, the ability
of a corporation to make good on its promises to pay might prove least likely.
TIPS and Inflation
TIPS produce the perfect hedge against inflation, because bond-payment mathematics dictate
direct correspondence between returns and changes in inflation rates. The combination of the
default-free character of full-faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S. government and the
mathematically certain protection against inflation provide investors with a powerful portfolio
tool.
Alignment of Interests
TIPS share with standard-issue Treasury offerings a balance in alignment of interests between
creditor and debtor. Unlike relationships between private borrowers and lenders, in which the
borrower seeks gains at the lender's expense, the government attempts to fashion a fair deal for
partics on both sides of the borrowing transaction.
In promoting TIPS, the Department of the Treasury highlights advantages to both the
creditor and the debtor. From the creditor's perspective, TIPS "provide a distinctive
contribution to any diversified portfolio." From the debtor's perspective, TIPS "allow Treasury
to broaden its investor base and diversify its funding risks."6 The evenhanded approach to
debtor and creditor separates the U.S. government from profit-secking private-sector
borrowers.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, outstanding issues of TIPS amounted to only $369 billion. First issued
by the U.S. Treasury in January 1997, the program provides a valuable, diversifying alternative
for investors. At year-end 2006, TIPS promised a real (after-inflation) yield of 2.4 percent with
an average maturity of 9.6 years and a duration of 6.4 years.
Summary
Although TIPS amount to only around 17 percent of the value of standard Treasury bonds,
inflation-sensitive TIPS constitute a compelling addition to the tool set available to investors.
Bolstered by the default-free, full-faith-and-credit backing of the U.S. government, TIPS serve
as a benchmark against which to measure other inflation-sensitive investments.
Real Estate
Investments in real estate provide investors with exposure to the benefits and risks of owning
office properties, apartment complexes, industrial warehouses, and retail establishments. High
quality real estate holdings produce significant levels of current cash flow generated by long-
term, in-place lease arrangements with creditworthy tenants. Properties that produce sustained
levels of high cash flow exhibit stable valuations, as a substantial portion of asset value stems
from relatively predictable cash flows. In contrast, properties that produce uncertain cash
flows, as in the case where leases approach expiration and owners face re-leasing risk, show near-
term variability in residual value. In the extreme case of properties that produce no cash flow,
real estate takes on a speculative aura as valuation depends entirely on prospective leasing
activity.
Real estate assets combine characteristics of fixed income and equity. Fixed income
attributes stem from the contractual obligation of tenants to make regular payments as
specified in the lease contract between tenant and landlord. Properties encumbered by long-
term lease obligations exhibit predominantly bond-like qualitics. Equity attributes stem from
the residual value associated with leases expected to be executed for currently vacant space or
for anticipated future vacancies. Properties without tenants or with tenants on short leases
exhibit predominantly equity-like qualities.
Archetypal real estate investments consist of well-lo ed, well-leased, high quality
properties that allow investors to anticipate regular receipt of rental income from leased space
and to expect income within a reasonable time frame from vacant space. Real estate with a
significant operating component fails to meet the set of core investment criteria, as the
operational attributes largely determine the investment outcome, creating an equity-like
investment play. Core investments do not include raw land, ground-up development activity
and hotel operations, primarily because these investments rely substantially on operating
expertise to produce cash flows.
Risk and Return Characteristics
Real estate returns and risks fall between those of bonds and equities. With bond-like rental
streams and equity-like residual values, investors expect real estate to produce results
somewhere between the results of the bond market and the stock market. Ibbotson Associates
data for the past eighty years indicate that stocks returned 10.4 percent annually and
government bonds 5.4 percent annually. Splitting the difference suggests that real estate
investors might realistically expect returns in the neighborhood of 2.5 percent per annum
above bonds.
Nearly two decades of data confirm the notion that real estate returns fall between stocks
and bonds. Returns covering 1987 to 2006 for a broad-based index of real estate holdings stand
at 8.4 perce
per annum, poised between the 11.8 perc
per annum return for the S&P 500
and the 6.5 percent per annum return for intermediate-term U.S. Treasury bonds.7 Capital
markets history confirms expectations regarding relative returns for real estate.
Valuation of real estate poses less of a challenge than does valuation of many other risky
assets. Consider the fact that, with markets in equilibrium, replacement cost for existing assets
constitutes an important determinant of market value. In fact, the real estate market provides a
powerful example of the efficacy of Tobin's "q," the ratio between market value and
replacement cost of an asset. If the market value of a particular real estate asset exceeds
replacement cost, nearby real estate development of a similar product type makes economic
sense. Clearly, under such circumstances, the income yield expressed as a percentage of cost of a
newly constructed building would exceed the income yield on the more highly valued existing
asset, creating incentives to build new, high-yielding buildings. Conversely, if replacement cost
exceeds market value, real estate development makes no economic scnsc. In such a situation,
the income yield on cost falls short of the income yield on less highly valued existing assets.
Instead of building new buildings, rational market participants buy existing properties, thereby
driving market values toward replacement cost.
Tobin's "q" proves particularly useful in the real estate market, because replacement cost
constitutes a readily determinable, easily observable variable. While in the stock market Tobin's
"q" produces insight into valuation of individual companies, broad market sectors, and even
the entire equity market, the challenges of determining replacement cost of today's complex,
far-flung corporate entities proves daunting. In contrast, assessing the cost of constructing a
suburban retail mall or a downtown office building proves far more manageable. In fact, many
knowledgeable investors assess an asset's cost of replication and then use discount to
replacement cost as an important investment criterion when making real estate acquisitions.
Public versus Private Holdings
Real estate investments hold the unusual distinction of offering large numbers of investment
vehicles in both publicly traded and privately held categories. The distinction between public
and private positions in real estate lies in form, not substance. Both public and private holdings
of real estate assets expose investors to the benefits and perils of property positions.
Many investors in real estate benefit from an unusual investment vehicle, the real estate
investment trust, or REIT. A REIT, unlike a typical corporate entity, pays no income taxes as
long as the REIT distributes at least 90 percent of its taxable income and generates at least 75
percent of that income from rents, mortgages, and sales of property. REITs serve as a pass-
through structure in which income passes through the security, without being taxed, to the
security holders who take responsibility for the tax liability, if any. REITs exist in both publicly
traded and privately held forms.
Even though both publicly traded and privately held real estate vehicles expose investors to
real estate assets, public-market securities frequently trade at prices that deviate from fair value.
Green Street Advisors, a highly regarded research firm that concentrates on publicly traded real
estate securities, routinely examines discrepancies between market price and fair value. The
results give short-term investors pause. At one point in 1990, by Green Street's estimate, real
estate securities traded at more than a 36 percent discount to fair value. By 1993, the stock
market reversed itself, valuing real-estate-related holdings at a 28 percent premium to fair value.
The yin and yang continued. In late 1994, the discount reached 9 percent, while in 1997, stock
market investors paid more than a 33 percent premium to fair value. In the late 1990s, a poor
market for real estate securities (that coincided with a wonderful market for most other
securities) brought valuations to a deficit of more than 20 percent, a level reached in early 2000.
As the non-real-estate portion of the stock market entered bear territory, real estate securities
took on bullish characteristics, leading to a greater-than-22-percent premium to fair value in
carly 2004. At year-end 2006, security prices stood at a not-too-hot and not-too-cold 2 percent
premium over fair value. The wide swings between price and fair value in the public securities
arena produced low correlation between returns of publicly traded and privately held real
estate assets, 10
Discrepancies between price and fair value disturb careless short-term players, because any
premium paid on purchases and any deficit incurred on sales loom large in damaging holding-
period returns. For canny investors, deviations between price and fair value allow purchases at a
discount and sales at a premium, buying low and selling high to enhance portfolio returns.
Longer term investors face fewer issues regarding differences between price and fair valuc,
because over longer investment horizons the short-term noise in the price/fair-value
relationship matters less. Careful investors either exploit price/fair-value differences or employ
dollar-cost averaging to enter and exit markets that deviate measurably from fair value.
Although exceptions exist, publicly traded real estate securities generally provide reasonably
low-cost exposure to relatively high quaility pools of real estate assets. Discrepancies between
market price and fair value create opportunities for investors to build portfolios using relatively
attractively priced assets. When REITs fall from favor, research analysts explain why the
publicly traded shares deserve a permanent discount to privately held assets, with justifications
ranging from illiquidity, management ineptitude, and high overhead costs, to the inflexibility
of REIT structures. When REITs ride high, the same analysts argue that public vehicles
command a premium for good reasons, including liquidity, management expertise, economies
of scale, and advantages of the REIT format. Regardless of the idea of the moment, sensible
investors favor REITs when portfolios trade at a discount to private market value and avoid
REITs when shares trade at a premium.
Active Management
Inefficiencies in the pricing and operation of real estate assets create opportunity for active
management. Investors increase return and lower risk by exercising careful judgment in
selecting assets and by using diligence in managing properties.
Real estate lends itself to active management because mispricings create opportunities for
nimble investors to take advantage of market anomalies. The task of identifying underpriced
and overpriced properties poses surmountable hurdles, since valuations depend largely on
readily observed variables. Calculation of replacement cost for an asset provides important
information on the value of a well-located property. Information on leases in place, combined
with projections of future lease rates and an estimate of residual value, produce an easily
analyzed stream of cash flows. Sales of comparable properties provide hard numbers reflecting
the willingness of investors to pay for bricks and mortar or a stream of expected cash flows.
Active management decisions for real estate rest on the fundamental characteristics of
replacement cost, discounted cash flows, and sales of similar assets, providing clear reference
points unavailable for most other asset types.
Sony Building Acquisition Douglas Emmett's 1993 acquisition of the Sony Building in
Burbank, California illustrates some important valuation tools. Los Angeles ranked among the
hardest hit markets in the real estate debacle of the early 1990s, with vacancy rates reaching a
staggering 24 percent for Class A office space in the metropolitan market. As a result, prices for
office buildings declined dramatically. In a signature transaction, Sam Zell, the famed "grave
dancer," bought Two California Plaza for $100 million, approximately one quarter of what it
cost to build a few years earlier.
Nearby Burbank, a distinctly different market with substantially stronger underlying
fundamentals, experienced sympathetic price declines, suffering by association with Los
Angeles. Amid the tumult, as part of a corporate rationalization program, Coca Cola decided
to sell the Burbank property housing its former subsidiary, Sony Pictures. The sales price of
$83 million compared favorably to the building's construction cost of more than $120 million,
providing the purchaser a 30 percent discount to replacement cost.
Cash flow from lease payments further supported the acquisition. One hundred percent of
the space was leased to Sony, at the time a credit rated single A by Standard & Poor's. If the
investor received only those payments guaranteed by Sony, all invested capital would be repaid
along with sufficient excess cash flow to generate annual returns of 123 percent. This low
double digit return included no estimate of residual value for the building upon expiration of
the lease. With reasonable assumptions regarding lease renewals and residual value, returns
jumped to the 20 percent to 25 percent range. In an interest rate environment where
comparable maturity U.S. Treasury Notes yielded about 6.5 percent, the relatively high quality
Sony payment stream represented a handsome baseline return for a deal with substantial upside
and little downside.
Comparable sales data tell less about the attractiveness of the Sony acquisition than about
the timing. The lack of bids for the Sony Building and other properties in the area signaled a
contrarian opportunity to buy deeply out-of-favor assets, not a lack of value. Fortified by
substantial discounts to replacement cost and high levels of investment grade cash flow,
investors move forward with confidence in the face of dismal market conditions. When the
tone of the market improves to the point that real estate players pronounce that asset
irreplacability justifics paying a meaningful premium to replacement cost and that a tight
leasing environment presages transformation of low current cash yields into higher future cash
flows, contrarian investors offer properties for sale.
The striking Sony building, with its handsome tenant finishes, promised a more-than-
satisfactory baseline return with the protection of a purchase price substantially below
replacement cost. VII The limited downside of the Sony Building along with substantial
potential upside created a positively skewed distribution of outcomes, providing extremely
attractive investment characteristics.
In fact, the Sony Building's appealing acquisition characteristics translated into an equally
appealing investment outcome. When Douglas Emmett converted the firm's pool of real estate
assets into a REIT in October 2006, each of the assets received a third party appraisal to
support the valuation and allocation of REIT shares. Based on the appraised value, the Sony
building (now called Studio Plaza) generated a holding period return in excess of 20 percent
per annum. Ultimately, Douglas Emmett's investors reaped rich rewards for the firm's
contrarian instincts and real estate management expertise.
**
Manager Specialization Investors generally benefit from engaging specialists to manage a
fund's commitment to real estate. Experts in a particular geography and a particular property
type-office, retail, residential, industrial-enjoy a substantial edge over generalist managers,
who suffer from spreading resources an inch deep and a mile wide. Specialization leads to
greater understanding of the particular dynamics of different markets, allowing one manager to
focus on the relatively static mass of central business district office buildings and another
manager to focus on the ever-changing inventory of suburban office properties. Similarly, one
manager might specialize in massive department store anchored malls and another might
specialize in smaller infill community retail centers. By concentrating management resources
on a fairly narrowly defined market segment, fund managers make better buys, better sales, and
better day-to-day asset management decisions.
Investors choosing to select a group of valuation-driven specialist managers create more
powerful portfolios, albeit at the price of a loss of diversification. By pursuing attractive
investment opportunities, selected on a bottom-up basis, funds develop concentrations in the
most out-of-favor asset types. For instance, prompted by relative valuations, investors may at
times hold outsized positions in California retail properties or Southeastern suburban office
buildings, creating a profile with dramatic deviations from the characteristics of any broad-
based real estate index. Even though idiosyncratic portfolios tend to exhibit substantial
tracking error relative to the market, a carefully chosen group of niche managers contains the
potential to produce outstanding investment results.
Real Estate Prices and Inflation
The strong relationship between replacement cost and market value leads to one of real estate's
most attractive investment attributes, a high correlation with inflation. Since the labor and
materials used to construct buildings rise in cost along with inflation, the replacement cost of
real estate tracks inflation closely. Yet even though replacement cost responds to changes in the
general price level, the nature of an asset's lease structure influences the rate of response of
changes in market value to inflationary pressures. For example, a property subject to long-term,
fixed-rate leases shows little near-term correlation to inflation. Only as lease expiration nears
will inflation influence asset valuation. Alternatively, properties with shorter-term leases exhibit
much greater inflation sensitivity. Moreover, some leases explicitly allow landlords to pass
through inflationary increases in expenses or, in the case of retail properties, contractually
entitle landlords to receive a percentage of sales. Such inflation-responsive lease structures cause
asset values to reflect inflationary moves.
The importance of replacement cost both in valuation analysis and in inflation sensitivity
relies on markets reflecting reasonable equilibrium between supply and demand. In cases where
supply of real estate space fails to match demand, prices respond to the disequilibrium, not to
the expected relationship with replacement cost or with inflation. In the late 1980s, investor
enthusiasm for owning commercial real estate and federal tax incentives for developing
properties combined to create a vast oversupply of commercial office buildings. The excesses in
the real estate market contributed to the savings and loan crisis, as many thrifts suffered from
the burden of underperforming or non-performing real estate loans. High quality, albeit
poorly leased, properties traded at steep discounts to replacement cost. Prices responded to the
disconnect between supply and demand, failing to track inflation. Similarly, in the early 2000s,
a post-Internet-bubble decline in demand for office space led to widespread vacancies and a
decline in real estate prices, resulting in a disequilibrium that decoupled falling real estate prices
from consistently positive levels of inflation. Unless markets operate in reasonable equilibrium,
the relationship between real estate prices and inflation breaks down. Yet when markets exhibit
equilibrium, sensitivity to changes in the general price level represents a particularly attractive
characteristic of real estate.
Alignment of Interests
In the realm of publicly traded REITs, investors face the same set of questions about alignment
of interests that apply to other publicly traded equities. Just as in the broader universe of
marketable stocks, interests of shareholders and managements generally, but imperfectly,
coincide.
In the world of private real estate vehicles, investors face a range of investment structures.
On one end of the continuum, high quality managers receive budgeted fees that reflect
reasonable costs of running an investment firm, receive profits interests only on returns in
excess of the opportunity cost of capital, and invest substantial assets side-by-side with
investors. On the other end of the continuum, low quality managers charge high fees on large
pools of assets, extract profits interests on returns in excess of investor capital contributions and
invest O.P.M., other people's money.
Market Characteristics
Real estate investors face significant investment opportunities in both public and private
markets. At December 31, 2006, the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts
tracked a universe of real estate securities that totaled $436 billion. The REIT population
posted a dividend yield of 3.3 percent and traded at a 2.2 percent premium over fair value.
At December 31, 2006, the NCREIF National Property Index included unleveraged real
estate assets valued at an aggregate of $247 billion. The privately held real estate cohort paid a
dividend yield of 6.2 percent, which represented a premium 1.5 percent over the ten-year U.S.
Treasury yield.
Summary
In terms of risk and return, real estate falls between higher risk equity and lower risk debt. The
hybrid nature of the expected investment characteristics matches the hybrid nature of the
fundamental traits of real estate investments. With its inflation-sensitive nature, real estate
provides powerful diversification to investor portfolios.
Real estate investors enjoy the opportunity to choose between publicly traded and privately
held investment vehicles. While sensible alternatives exist in both public and private forms,
careful investors pay close attention to fee arrangements and look hard at manager quality.
Oil and Gas
Oil and gas investments provide claims on future streams of inflation-sensitive income,
supplying protection against unanticipated inflation and playing an important role in portfolio
diversification. In addition to furnishing attractive diversifying characteristics, oil and gas assets
present opportunities for superior managers to add value.
Market participants gain exposure to energy assets either by acquiring futures contracts or
by purchasing oil and gas reserves; whether through futures positions or reserve acquisitions,
investors seek price-driven returns. In order to gain commodity exposure without betting
exclusively on prices, savvy investors structure portfolios around value-added purchases of well-
defined energy reserves operated by superior management teams.
Oil and gas reserve purchases boast a number of advantages over the simple price exposure
provided by futures contracts. First, reserve acquisitions tend to produce high, cquity-like
expected returns. Over the past two decades, well-structured investments in low-risk producing
reserves typically generated low double-digit unleveraged returns, without considering price
movements. Second, superior active managers add value in the process of acquiring,
developing, financing, operating, and liquidating assets. Expertise and discipline create more
value in the complex physical world of natural resources than in the highly efficient financial
world of commodities markets. Finally, long duration energy reserves provide a long-term
hedge against sustained periods of high energy prices.
Public versus Private Holdings
Ironically, diversified portfolios of public securities produce less transparent and less effective
exposure to energy prices than do focused private acquisitions of energy reserves. In the realm
of publicly traded energy companies, investors face questions regarding the degree to which
integrated oil companies consume oil and gas (as inputs to the refining process, for example)
and the degree to which companies produce oil and gas (as outputs of the exploration process,
for example). Even if investors successfully determine the net corporate exposure to energy
prices, the question of company hedging policies remains. Broadly diversified, publicly traded
companies provide uncertain exposure to energy prices, leading real assets investors to prefer
pure private reserve acquisition plays.
Active Management
Purchases of oil and gas reserves by high quality active managers provide investors with the
opportunity to gain exposure to energy prices and to earn a significant baseline rate of return.
Merit Energy Company, founded in 1989 by Bill Gayden, a former colleague of Ross Perot,
successfully delivered on the twin promises of handsome returns from disciplined
underwriting and substantial portfolio diversification from energy price exposure.
Merit typically acquires low-risk oil and gas reserves using assumptions that produce a 12
percent to 14 percent return without assuming energy price appreciation or depreciation. In a
remarkable coincidence between acquisition assumptions and subsequent reality, from 1990 to
2005, Merit produced net returns of 19.2 percent per annum, which consisted of 12.2 percent
from acquisition economics, 21 percent from improved operations and development, and 4.9
percent from price appreciation.
Presumably, investors in energy price futures would have obtained only the roughly 5
percent per annum price appreciation. Investors in reserve purchase programs received double-
digit returns above and beyond the price movement, dominating the results of the commodity
futures investors.
Energy Prices and Inflation
Energy investments belong in the real assets portfolio because of their strong correlation with
inflation. Energy constitutes roughly nine percent of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), creating
a direct link to inflation. Unsurprisingly, an Ibbotson Associates study found a positive
correlation between direct energy production investments and CPI, using data for the period
from 1970 to 1998,11 In contrast, Ibbotson found a negative correlation between direct energy
investments and a variety of marketable securities, including domestic stocks, foreign stocks,
Treasury bonds, and Treasury bills. Both statistics and common sense support the idea of
energy investments as a hedge against inflation.
Alignment of Interests
The old saw-that sensible investors never back an energy partnership touted on Wall Street,
because all the good deals come together in Houston-contains some truth. Poorly structured
oil and gas partnerships abound. Unscrupulous operators gain advantage over nave investors
by exploiting the complexities of industry-specific concepts such as net profits interests,
overriding royalty interests, working interests, net revenue interests, and operating interests.
That said, by following sensible deal structuring principles, including a high level of co-
investment by the deal's promoter, investors create the opportunity to enjoy the significant
benefits of investments in producing oil and gas reserves.
Market Characteristics
Oil and gas investors confront a broad tableau, including marketable energy equities of $4.6
trillion, representing 10 percent of global equities as of December 31, 2006. Institutional
private investments amounted to $28 billion on December 31, 2006, according to Cambridge
Associates, of which $20 billion pursued energy reserve purchases.
Summary
Energy investments provide dramatic diversification to institutional portfolios, as energy prices
show negative correlation to traditional securities over many time periods. Pure price exposure,
as obtained through the purchase of energy futures contracts, comes at a high price in the form
of low expected return. Sensible investors opt for reserve purchase programs that promise price
exposure (along with the accompanying diversification) and returns in the low double-digit
range. Perhaps more than in any other investment activity, investors must be wary of low
quality operators with opaque, egregious deal structures.
Timber
Timberland offers strong return potential, steady cash flow, inflation protection, and portfolio
diversification. Investment returns stem from several sources, the most important being the
value of timber harvested and changes in the value of residual timber and land. Timber values,
which relate to the biological growth of trees and changes in timber prices, can be influenced
by sound silvicultural practices. The sale of conservation casements and land parcels for
"higher and better use" (HBU) provide the potential to boost returns. Finally, incremental
revenue can be generated through other activities, including leasing of land for the exploitation
of mineral deposits, recreational pastimes, and alternative energy uses.
Historically, timber has performed well as an investment, although accurate data are
difficult to obtain. The most frequently cited series, first created by Hancock Timber Resource
Group, combines known timber prices with assumptions about forest growth and value to
generate a timberland return series beginning in 1960.VIII Hancock/NCREIF estimates that
U.S. timberland returned 12.7 percent per annum from 1960 through 2005, or roughly 8.1
percent per annum after i ion. Since 1987, the NCREIF Timberland Property Inde
produced a cash yield of approximately 6 percent per annum.
In addition to generating strong returns, timberland provides diversification relative to
securities markets: the Hancock/NCREIF index exhibited a correlation of -0.17 with the S&P
500. In part, low correlation stems from the consistent return to timberland from biological
growth. While the S&P 500 produced a calendar loss cleven times since 1960, the timberland
index generated a loss in only one of those eleven years and losses on only three years overall.
Like other real assets, timberland serves as a hedge against unanticipated inflation. Because
timber is a basic production input for a number of end products, changes in timber prices
correlate strongly with inflation.
Timberland Ownership
The U.S. Forest Service classifics approximately 22 percent of the United States as timberland,
or land capable of producing industrial wood.ix Federal, state, and local governments own
nearly 30 percent of U.S. timberland, with a higher ownership percentage in the Pacific
Northwest and a lower percentage in the South. Nonindustrial users hold approximately 80
percent of privately owned timberland, much of it not suitable for institutional investment.
The Hancock Group estimates the investable universe is only 20 percent to 30 percent of
nonindustrial private timberland, with the remainder consisting of small, low quality or poorly
located tracts. Combining industrial timberland with investable nonindustrial private
timberland gives a total U.S. investable timberland base of approximately $125 billion. By
comparison, the value of investable real estate in the United States is approximately $3.5
trillion.X
In recent years, ownership of timberland in the United States shifted from forest products
companies to institutional investors. At one time, companies viewed timberland ownership as
essential, providing mills with a captive, dependable source of raw materials. Over time, the
inefficiencies in ownership and management of forestry assets became apparent as trees were
cut without regard to economic value to keep a steady supply of wood arriving at the mill.
Several large companies that separated the mill operations and timber operations into
independent entities saw dramatic bottom-line improvements in both segments.
Once companies viewed timberland assets as distinct from the core wood processing
business, companies became less attached to holding massive wood inventories and more
focused on the benefits of selling timberlands. First, timberland sales offered a means of raising
capital to modernize mills, streamline operations, or pay down debt. Second, timberland sales
offered the opportunity to boost stock prices through the realization of hidden value and by
raising returns on capital. Finally, some companies divested U.S. holdings to move into lower
cost, higher productivity timberlands in other regions of the world.
Over the past decade, approximately 33 million acres of timber-land traded in the United
States with annual sales averaging 2.6 percent of the investable timberland universe. Most
timberland on the selling block ended up in the hands of newly created timberland REITs or
newly interested institutional investors. The new owners often did not own mill assets,
allowing them to focus exclusively on maximizing the value of the timberlands. As a result, the
new owners adopted more sophisticated financially driven silvicultural techniques, more
extensive merchandising operations, and more aggressive monetization strategies for
nontimber values.
Timber Pricing
As with any other product, the locus of supply and demand drives timber prices. Local,
national, and global dynamics all influence the price a landowner receives for logs.
At a local level, the supply of timber depends on everything from weather conditions to the
availability of loggers. Timber demand at a local level derives from mills which purchase
delivered logs or buy stumpage from timberland owners.XI Because of the high costs of
transporting logs, proximity to a mill influences the price a timberland owner receives for logs.
Mill closures diminish local demand for logs, pushing prices lower. On the flip side, new mills
and mill modernization programs drive prices higher.
Ultimately, end product demand supports timber prices. Industries important to timber
demand include construction (both new home construction and renovations), paper and
packaging, and furnishings. Lumber and wood panel products, for example, which are heavily
used in construction and remodeling make up over 50 percent of U.S. wood product
production. Strong levels of new home construction, home renovations, and GDP growth
translate into strong demand for lumber. The inverse holds true, as weak end product demand
leads to mill closures and weak timber prices.
Over short time horizons, timber prices experience swings driven by end product demand
cyclicality. Over a longer time horizon, timber prices benefit from increasing global demand for
forest products. However, secular demand trends for certain products do not support
increased demand for certain types of timber. For example, in recent years, increased use of
electronic media led to reduced growth in demand for paper, paperboard, and newsprint.
However, many other timber end products have less obvious or cost effective substitutes.
Lumber, for example, remains a cheap and efficient construction material, with no serious
substitutes on the horizon.
Differences in end product demand drive variations in prices for different timber species
and grades. Determinants of prices for small, low-quality trees used for pulp differ from those
that influence prices for large, high quality trees used in furniture production. In addition,
changing technologies create relative price differentials among types of timber. For example,
the development of oriented strand board (OSB), a panel of material made from stacked sheets
of narrow wood strips, has led to a decrease in demand for plywood and the large diameter logs
required to make plywood.
International dynamics affect timber supply and demand, as imports and exports of wood
products play a significant role in determining timber prices. While approximately 11 percent
of the U.S. harvest is exported, imports, primarily from Canada, account for nearly 25 percent
of U.S. forest products consumption. U.S. dollar-Canadian dollar currency fluctuations
strongly influence U.S. forest product and timber prices.
Active Management
Investments in timberland follow two principles that underlie attractive real assets investments.
First, discounted pricing contributes to high risk-adjusted returns. In the case of timber,
investors seek substantial discounts to the metric of standing timber value. Second,
opportunities to create value independent of market or commodity price fluctuations add to
the attractiveness of timber investments.
Active management plays a somewhat less critical role in real estate, energy, and timber
investments than it does in illiquid investments in leveraged buyouts and venture capital.
Because the assets themselves drive a substantial portion of real estate, energy, and timber
returns, investors receive the asset-based returns even in the absence of stellar active
management. In contrast, without superb active management, investments in venture capital
make no sense at all.
Timber Prices and Inflation
Timberland shines during periods of high inflation and market turmoil. In the inflationary
years of 1973 and 1974, for example, the S&P 500 returned an annualized -20.8 percent. After
adjusting for inflation of 10.5 percent per year, the S&P generated an annualized return of an
even more dismal -28.3 percent. Over those same two years, however, timberland returned a
nominal 36.6 percent per year, equating to an annualized real return of 23.7 percent. That said,
because links to inflation require that markets operate in reasonable equilibrium, secular trends
that influence end-product demand might overwhelm short-term inflation sensitivity,
disappointing the inflation hedging aspirations of timberland investors.
Alignment of Interests
Timber investment management organizations (TIMOs) provide a vehicle through which
investors might participate in timberland investments. In the 1990s, when institutional
investors began to show interest in timber, the existing TIMOs exhibited a variety of problems.
Many were owned by large banks or insurance companies, creating the potential for conflicts
between the interests of the financial conglomerate and the interests of the institutional
timberland investor. Further limiting the set of attractive alternatives, a number of TIMOs
employed unappealing allocation models, either allocating investments to specific investors on
a first-come, first-served basis or on a subjective assessment of client needs and preferences. Few
TIMOs sported sensible structures.
Today, a number of TIMOs meet reasonable institutional standards, with independent
organizations offering well-structured com-mingled funds that contain fair deal terms. Even so,
investors must continue to look out for and avoid the structural deficits that plagued the
timber management industry in the 1990s.
Market Characteristics
According to Cambridge Associates, as of December 31, 2006, thirty TIMOs managed a total
of $5.9 billion in commingled funds. Separate institutional accounts managed by those same
TIMOs amount to an additional $14.0 billion. Timber REITs provide a further $11.9 billion
of investment opportunity.
Summary
Timber offers institutional portfolios an opportunity to realize high risk-adjusted returns and a
degree of protection against unanticipated inflation. Along with real estate and energy
investments, timber provides a hedge against inflation without the significant opportunity
costs of investment in TIPS.
Sustainable harvests of timberland produce substantial cash flows, similar to the high
income levels characteristic of other real assets investments. The inefficiencies in the illiquid
markets for timber create opportunities for high quality managers to add substantial value.
Timber represents a valuable addition to the set of institutional investment alternatives.
PRIVATE EQUITY
Properly selected investments in leveraged buyouts and venture capital generate high returns
relative to other equity alternatives, enhancing overall portfolio results. Superior private equity
returns come at the price of higher risk levels, as investors expose assets to greater financial
leverage (in the case of buyouts) and more substantial operating uncertainty (in the case of
venture capital). Because of the strong fundamental links between private equity investments
and marketable equities, private equity provides limited diversification to investors.
Private equity investments overcome the problems associated with divergence of interests
between shareholders and management evident in many of today's publicly traded companies.
Separation of ownership (by shareholders) and control (by management) results in a
substantial gap between the interests of shareholders and the actions of management, since
without significant equity interests managers often pursue a wide range of activities designed
to improve their lot at the expense of outside owners. Over-the-top offices, excessive salaries,
bloated fleets of airplanes, and other unjustified managerial perquisites rarely enter the picture
in profit-oriented private investments. Private company managements operate with longer time
horizons and lower risk aversion, aggressively pursuing strategies that promote creation of
enterprise value. Because private deals generally require management to take material
ownership stakes, interests of outside owners and operating management align.
In the venture capital world, entrepreneurial start-ups engage individuals who exhibit a
single-minded focus on building successful companies. In the realm of buyouts, companies
attract management devoted to improving the operation's bottom line, addressing the
challenges of a highly leveraged capital structure with the goal of achieving a profitable exit.
Managements in buyout and venture deals share the goals and objectives of owners.
In spite of differences between the technology orientation of traditional venture capital and
the mature business bias of the leveraged buyout arena, discussions of private equity generally
include both venture and buyout investments. In addition to the shared characteristics of
illiquidity and high return potential, venture and buyout investing embrace a scope of activities
that share important attributes with marketable equities.
Leveraged buyouts respond to many of the same factors that influence marketable
securities. In fact, in transactions driven solely by financial engineering, buyouts simply
represent turbo-charged equity, with leverage magnifying the results-good or bad-produced
by a particular company. For example, when Warburg Pincus took Bausch & Lomb private in a
2007 leveraged buyout transaction, the fundamental nature of the company's consumer
products business remained the same. Bausch & Lomb continued as the self-described "eye
health company dedicated to perfecting vision and enhancing life for consumers around the
world."12 Corporate valuation continued to respond to changes in consumer demand,
commodity prices, production efficiency, and regulatory activity. The underlying similarity
between the publicly traded Bausch & Lomb and the privately held Bausch & Lomb suggests
that investors should expect high levels of correlation between marketable securities and
leveraged buyouts.
Although early stage venture capital lacks strong links with marketable equities, later stage
venture investing depends significantly on the stock market. Later stage venture investments
provide capital for companies ready to go public or to be sold, buying the company time to
wait for a ready public market or an attractive corporate suitor. Market action influences the
price at which later stage venture investors enter an investment and plays an even more critical
role in the price at which investors exit successful positions.
Even early stage valuations respond somewhat to equity market conditions. When
entrepreneurs start companies in an industry favored by the equity markets, venture capitalists
pay premium prices to participate. Conversely, less highly desired enterprises command lower
entry valuations, providing investors with relatively attractive starting points. As companies
mature, equity market conditions increasingly influence venture capital valuations.
In their most basic form, venture and buyout investing represent a riskier means of
obtaining equity exposure. The high leverage inherent in buyout transactions and the
corporate immaturity intrinsic to venture investments cause investors to experience greater
fundamental risk and to expect materially higher investment returns.
Strangely, historical results generally fail to reflect the hoped-for enhanced returns, while
both correlation measures and risk levels fall below expectations. Unfortunately, poor returns
for private investing probably reflect reality while the lower-than-expected correlation and
lower-than-expected risk constitute a statistical artifact. Illiquidity masks the relationship
between fundamental drivers of company value and changes in market price, causing private
equity's diversifying power to appear artificially high. If two otherwise identical companies
differ only in the form of organization-one private, the other public-the infrequently and
less aggressively valued private company appears much more stable than the frequently valued
publicly traded company, particularly in a world where securities markets exhibit excess
volatility. Even though both companies react in identical fashion to fundamental drivers of
corporate value, the less volatile private entity boasts superior risk characteristics, based solely
on mis-measurement of the company's true underlying volatility. Not only does lack of day-to-
day valuation information reduce reported risk levels, the private company gains spurious
diversifying characteristics based solely on lack of co-movement with the more frequently
valued public company.
While a fair portion of the observed "diversification provided by private equity stems from
the infrequent valuations accorded illiquid assets, some lack of correlation between marketable
and private assets results from value-added strategies pursued by private firms. Consider the
case of an idea, a garage and an entrepreneur financed with venture capital. As the company
develops its product, initiates sales and becomes profitable, value creation takes place
independent of the action on the floor of the stock exchange. Because results from company
building activities loom large relative to results from the original corporate base, venture
investments provide diversification relative to traditional marketable securities.
Similar value-added possibilities exist in the leveraged buyout arena, allowing adept private
investors to enhance returns by achieving operating improvements in portfolio companies.
Because buyout transactions generally involve companies with a reasonably substantial
corporate base, market influences play the primary role in valuation, with firm-specific value-
added opportunities playing a secondary role. Even though when compared to venture capital
investments the more mature buyout companies offer less dramatic opportunities for business
growth, value-added strategies contain the potential to offer a source of uncorrelated returns.
Pure financial engineering holds little interest for serious private equity investors, since
providing financing represents a commodity-like activity with low barriers to entry. In the
leveraged buyout business, simply adding leverage to a company increases expected returns and
boosts risk levels, doing nothing to promote the goal of achieving risk-adjusted returns. In the
venture capital arena, later stage investors supply little more than cash, hoping to benefit from
the work of early stage investors and the prospect of achieving rapid liquidity through an initial
public offering or sale. Private investors offering only capital operate in an extremely
competitive market with reasonably efficient pricing mechanisms and little opportunity to
demonstrate an investment edge.
Private equity opportunities become compelling only when managers pursue well-
considered value-added strategies. By seeking to improve corporate operations in the context of
an appropriate financial structure, investors increase the scope of return-generating activity,
allowing realization of superior results less dependent on the whims of the market.
Leveraged Buyouts
Leveraged buyout transactions involve private ownership of mature corporate entities with
greater-than-usual levels of debt on their balance sheets. The high levels of leverage produce a
correspondingly high degree of variability in outcomes, both good and bad. Leveraged buyout
investments, in the absence of value-adding activities by the transaction sponsor, simply
increase the risk profile of the company.
The increase in risk generally comes at a high price. Buyout partnerships charge substantial
management fees (often ranging between 1.5 percent and 2.5 percent of committed funds), a
significant profits interest (usually 20 percent), and a variety of transactions and monitoring
fees. The general partners of many buyout funds suggest that they engage in more than simple
financial engineering, arguing that they bring special value-creation skills to the table. While
the value added by operationally oriented buyout partnerships may, in certain instances,
overcome the burden imposed by the typical buyout fund's generous fee structure, in aggregate
buyout investments fail to match public market alternatives. After adjusting for the higher level
of risk and the greater degree of illiquidity in buyout transactions, publicly traded equity
securities gain a clear advantage.
Performance and Buyout Funds
In the private equity world, active management success goes hand-in-glove with investment
success. In asset classes such as domestic equity and fixed income, which contain passive
investment alternatives, investors can buy the market. By owning a marketable security index
fund, investors reap market returns in a cost-efficient, reliable manner. In the inefficient private
equity world, investors cannot buy the market, as no investable index exists. Even if a leveraged
buyout index existed, based on past performance, index-like results would fail to satisfy investor
desires for superior risk-adjusted returns. In fact, only top-quartile or top-decile funds produce
returns sufficient to compensate for private equity's greater illiquidity and higher risk. In the
absence of truly superior fund selection skills (or extraordinary luck), investors should stay far,
far away from private equity investments.
Consider two decades of buyout partnership returns. For funds formed beginning in 1985,
limited partners received a disappointing 7.3 percent median return. In contrast, the S&P 500
delivered 11.9 percent returns. First quartile buyout results reach double digits with a 16.1
percent per annum result, while third quartile performance falls into negative territory at -1.4
percent per annum. The median buyout result compares unfavorably to the marketable
security alternative which produced higher returns with less risk. 13
Academic research backs up the notion that private equity produces generally mediocre
results. Steven Kaplan of the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and
Antoinette Schoar of the Sloan School of Management at MIT, in an August 2005 study on
private equity performance, conclude that "LBO fund returns net of fees are slightly less than
those of the S&P 500."14 The study covers the period from 1980 to 2001. Kaplan and Schour's
results should dismay prospective private equity investors. Because the authors make no
adjustment for leverage, the failure of LBO funds to match stock market returns adds the
insult of higher risk to the injury of poor performance.
Investors in buyout partnerships received miserable risk-adjusted returns over the past two
decades. Since the only material differences between privately owned buyouts and publicly
traded companies lic in the nature of ownership (private vs. public) and character of capital
structure (highly leveraged vs. less highly leveraged), comparing buyout returns to public
market returns makes sense as a starting point. But, because the riskier, more-leveraged buyout
positions ought to generate higher returns, sensible investors recoil at the buyout industry's
deficit relative to public market alternatives. On a risk-adjusted basis, marketable equities win
in a landslide.
A Yale Investments Office study provides insight into the additional return required to
compensate for the risk in leveraged buyout transactions. Examination of 542 buyout deals
initiated and concluded between 1987 and 1998 showed gross returns of 48 percent per
annum, significantly above the 17 percent return that would have resulted from comparably
timed and comparably sized investments in the S&P 500. On the surface, buyouts beat stocks
by a wide margin. Adjustment for management fees and general partners' profit participation
bring the estimated buyout result to 36 percent per year, still comfortably ahead of the
marketable security alternative. Note the extreme positive bias of the buyout sample. Long-
term studies show that median buyout returns fall in the neighborhood of those produced by
the S&P 500. In the sample of deals presented to Yale, buy-outs crush marketable securities. XII
Because buyout transactions by their very nature involve higher-than-market levels of
leverage, the basic buyout-fund-to-marketable-security comparison fails the apples-to-apples
standard. To produce a risk-neutral comparison, consider the impact of applying leverage to
public market investments. Comparably timed, comparably sized, and comparably leveraged
investments in the S&P 500 produced an astonishing 86 percent annual return. The risk-
adjusted marketable security result exceeded the buyout result of 36 percent per year by an
astounding 50 percentage points per year.
Some part of the failure of buyout managers to produce attractive risk-adjusted returns
stems from an inappropriate fee structure. Buyout investors generally pay 20 percent of profits
to the investment firm's partners. Because the incentive compensation fails to consider the
investor's cost of capital, buyout partnerships capture 20 percent of returns generated by the
favorable wind at the long-term equity investor's back. Of course, in the case of transactions
that employ greater-than-market levels of leverage, the investor's cost of capital increases along
with the degree of leverage. Pure financial engineering represents a commodity, easily available
to marketable securities investors through margin accounts and futures markets. Buyout
managers deserve scant incremental compensation for adding debt to corporate balance sheets.
By paying buyout partnership sponsors 20 percent of all gains, the fund investors compensate
the fund managers with a significant portion of leveraged market gains over which the fund
manager exercises no control and for which the fund managers deserves no credit. The large
majority of buyout funds fail to add sufficient value to overcome a grossly unreasonable fee
structure.
Another part of the industry-wide problem of poor returns relates to misalignment of
incentives in large funds. Buyout firms generally begin with modest amounts of assets under
management, totaling in the hundreds of millions of dollars, Management fees cover overhead
and incentive fees reward superior performance. Successful buyout funds almost invariably
increase fund size, for example, moving from $250 million for Fund I to $500 million for Fund
II to $1 billion for Fund III to $2 billion for Fund IV and ever more for funds of increasing
numerals. As fund size increases, management fees as a percentage of assets remain relatively
constant, resulting in a dramatic increase in the dollar value of fee income. The change in
compensation structure alters general partner motivation.
The partners of newer, smaller funds focus predominantly on generating investment
returns. Since modest levels of fees cover reasonable operating expenses, strong investment
returns define the only path to wealth. Not only do superior returns lead to large profits
interests, strong results allow the general partners to raise subsequent, ever larger funds.
Eventually, as fund size increases, fee income becomes an increasingly significant profit
center. As fee income grows, general partner behavior changes, focusing on protecting the
firm's franchise and maintaining the annuity-like character of the stream of fees. Larger buyout
funds pursue less risky deals, employing lower levels of leverage. Mega funds often exploit their
franchises by expanding into other (fee-generating) lines of business, including real estate, fixed
income, and hedge fund management. The big partnerships devote more time to cultivating
and nourishing limited partner relationships, the source of the funds (and fees). Less time
remains for investment activity. Returns suffer.
Past return data provide dramatic support for the notion that larger funds produce inferior
results. For the ten years ending December 31, 2005, buyout funds with more than $1 billion
of committed capital produced returns of 9.3 percent per year, falling short of both the overall
buyout industry return of 9.7 percent per year and the $500 million to $1 billion cohort return
of 10.3 percent. Buyouts in the range of $250 million to $500 million performed even better,
posting results of 11.4 percent per annum.15 Large size correlates with
returns.
Academic work supports the negative relationship between size and performance. Josh
Lerner of Harvard Business School and Antoinette Schoar of MIT's Sloan School found "a
strong relationship between fund growth and returns-the more dramatic the increase
between two funds, the sharper the decline in return between the funds."16 Increases in fund
size benefit the general partner at the limited partners' expense.
Casual observers might draw the superficial conclusion that the key to success in buyout
investing involves concentrating on smaller buyout funds. While smaller funds undoubtedly
offer greater alignment of interests between the general partners and the passive providers of
funds, a policy of simply choosing to invest in smaller funds may not lead to satisfactory
results.
First, after adjusting the returns of smaller buyout funds to account for higher levels of risk,
excess returns may disappear. Smaller buyout funds invest in smaller companics, which
necessarily carry higher levels of operational risk. Adding greater operational risk to higher
financial risk creates a substantial risk-adjusted hurdle for the small-company-buyout investor.
Investors must receive material compensation for the heightened risk and additional illiquidity
in small company buyout investing.
Second, an investor backing smaller buyout funds solely based on historical performance
makes the mistake of investing while looking through the rearview mirror. Superior absolute, if
not risk-adjusted, returns attract flows of capital. As market participants conclude that small
buyouts outperform large buyouts, the market responds by creating large numbers of
partnerships devoted to pursuing middle-market buyout transactions. Any excess returns that
may have existed will be threatened by the influx of new capital and new participants. Be wary
of the market's ability to eliminate sources of superior risk-adjusted returns.
Yale's Experience Yale's buyout portfolio returns provide a ray of hope to investors secking
risk-adjusted excess returns. The university attempts to invest only with firms that place central
importance on enhancing the effectiveness of corporate operations. Company building
strategies permit buyout fund managers to add value beyond the increase in returns expected
from adopting higher risk capital structures. By identifying managers that implement
operationally oriented strategies, Yale creates the possibility of winning in a tough arena.
Consider the data in the study of buyout transactions presented to Yale between 1987 and
1998, as shown in Table 8.1. Yale participated in 118 of 542 transactions in the sample,
generating gross returns of 63 percent relative to a risk equivalent benchmark of 41 percent. If
the risk adjustment appropriately captures the return expected from financial engineering, the
premium return earned by Yale represents value added by the fund manager. Even though fund
manager fees take an estimated 15 percentage points of annual return, the university's net
returns of 48 percent still comfortably exceed the risk-adjusted marketable securities bogey.
Yale's buyout results rely far less on leverage than do the results of the broad pool of buyout
transactions. Contrast the broad pool's nearly 70 percentage point difference between the
unlevered S&P return and the risk-adjusted benchmark with Yale's 21 percentage point
difference. Less reliance on leverage and more attention to operations lead to superior risk-
adjusted results. By employing an approach that emphasizes operating improvements and
employs lower leverage, Yale's buyout portfolio manages to produce handsome absolute and
risk-adjusted returns.
Table 8.1 Buyout Managers Fail to Create Excess Returns
Completed Deals, 1987-1998
Buyout return
Risk-equivalent marketable security benchmark
S&P 500 benchmark
Number of deals
Source: Yale University Investments Office.
Entire Sample
Yale's Portfolio
Retum Debt/Equity Ratio Return Debe/Equity Ratio
48%
5.2
63%
28
86%
5.2
41%
28
17%
0.8
07
542
118
Active Management
No sensible investor manages private assets passively. Even if participation in a broadly
diversified market alternative were available, investors would face nearly certain
disappointment. Burdened by staggering fees and characterized by well above marketable
equity risk levels, a broad collection of private funds would likely produce returns far from
sufficient to compensate for the risk incurred. Investors justify the inclusion of private equity
in portfolios only by selecting top quality managers pursuing value-added strategies with
appropriate deal structures.
Due Diligence The character of a private equity fund's investment principals constitutes the
single most important criterion in evaluating the merits of an investment. Driven, intelligent,
ethical individuals operating in a cohesive partnership possess an edge likely to translate into
superior investment results. On the other end of the spectrum, individuals willing to cut
corners, operationally, intellectually, or ethically, place an investor's funds and reputation at
risk.
The central importance of choosing strong investment partners places enormous weight on
the due diligence process. Concluding that a private equity firm consists of credible,
professionally qualified individuals in pursuit of interesting investment opportunities serves
merely as a starting point. Before making a commitment, careful investors determine that the
fund's principals exhibit the characteristics necessary to justify entrusting institutional assets to
their care. Because of the long-term nature of private equity contracts, investors ultimately rely
on the good faith of fund managers to behave in the best interests of the limited partners.
While negotiating appropriate deal terms remains important, contractual arrangements almost
invariably fail to deal with all of the important issues that ultimately arise in the general
partner/limited partner relationship. Good people can overcome bad contracts, but good
contracts cannot overcome bad people.
Comprehensive due diligence requires substantial effort. Personal and professional
references provided by prospective fund managers provide an initial set of contacts. Because of
the inevitable selection bias in a hand-picked reference list, sensible investors seek candid,
confidential assessments from other individuals, including both business colleagues and
personal acquaintances. Over time, investors develop networks that facilitate reference
checking and increase the quality of decision making. Careful investors make skeptical calls,
actively looking for potential issues. Going through the motions by conducting superficial
checks adds nothing to the due diligence process.
Careful investors evaluate the fund manager's investment operation by spending sufficient
time at the firm's offices to assess the character of the workplace. Firms exhibit distinct
personalities that influence the quality of operations in fundamental ways, suggesting that
investors favor those groups deemed a good personality fit. Spending time in informal, social
settings further enhances the information set used to evaluate the decision makers. Selecting
individuals driven to produce superior results in a high quality manner constitutes the central
challenge of manager selection.
In spite of the enormous importance of conducting thorough due diligence, many investors
fail to devote the time and energy necessary to make well-informed judgments. In 1999, one of
the principals of a $2 billion buyout fund reported that only one investor took the time to meet
the firm's full team before committing funds. By foregoing the opportunity to assess the
quality of an investment operation's personnel, prospective investors fail to execute the most
important task.
Long-Term Commitments Private investment addresses Keynes's notion that the job of
investment might be done better if decisions were "permanent and indissoluble, like marriage,
except by reason of death or other grave cause..."17 While falling somewhat short of the
gravity of the decision to marry, funding a private equity firm represents a long-term
commitment. In contrast to the termination of a marketable securities manager where the
vestiges of any relationship quickly disappear, evidence from terminated private investment
funds remains on the books for years to come. Knowledge that private investment decisions
represent long-term commitments forces sensible investors to establish high hurdles for
initiating investment relationships.
The illiquid nature of private investing allows private equity managers to make the longer
term decisions necessary to pursue successful investment strategies. Marketable securities
managers know that clients possess little patience for performance shortfall, pulling the trigger
quickly when the numbers fail to meet expectations. As a result, stock jockeys learn to
overdiversify portfolios, holding small positions in securities selected as much to avoid
disappointment as to generate exciting returns. In contrast, private fund managers "lock in"
assets for long periods of time, with partnership terms that often span a decade or more. While
the typical fundraising cycle of two to three years might pressure managers to shorten
investment time frames, investors frequently accept the argument that "it's too early to judge
the most recent fund," allowing private asset managers to make truly long-term decisions.
In fact, when evaluating private funds, investors face little choice but to focus on changes in
corporate operations, not minute-by-minute fluctuations in market value. By emphasizing an
investment's intrinsic valuc, investors assess factors under the manager's control, liberating
private fund managers from the frequently fickle judgments of the equity markets and
allowing pursuit of sensible investment strategies.
Strong private equity groups use the long investment horizon to pursue strategies that add
substantial value to corporate activities. Fund managers providing only capital operate at a
competitive disadvantage to groups that improve company operations in a fundamental way.
In the leveraged buyout arena, supplying money to purchase a well-run company constitutes a
commodity, as all major investment funds boast the financial skills necessary to complete plain
vanilla transactions. Low barriers to entry allow former investment bankers to respond to mid-
career crises by abandoning the life of an agent and embracing the glories of an investment
principal, flooding the market with capital to pursue "clean" deals. In contrast, buyout firms
that demonstrate the ability to deal with substantial operating issues carve out a special
transactional niche, creating the potential for less competitive, proprietary deal flow. The
combination of less competition for operationally oriented transactions and potential benefits
from addressing operational issues provides a compelling investment opportunity.
Clayton, Dubilier & Rice and WESCO Clayton, Dubilier & Rice (CDR), a firm with a long
distinguished track record, focuses its efforts on "messy" deals-transactions that require a
high degree of intervention by the principals. The firm implements its value-added investment
strategy by bringing individuals with operating backgrounds into the partnership. These
partners provide valuable perspective during the due diligence process, identifying acquisition
candidates that might benefit from the firm's unusual skills. Once CDR acquires a company,
operating partners take a "hands on" approach to improving corporate operations. One
subclass of transactions that CDR pursues involves corporate divestitures. Frequently, the
divested subsidiary lacks basic corporate organizational structure, having relied on the parent
company to provide a variety of essential business services. Value creation results as CDR uses
its combination of operational and financial expertise to create a stand-alone company from
the erstwhile corporate division.
In February 1993, CDR principals began evaluating a spin-off of WESCO, Westinghouse's
electrical equipment and supplies distribution arm. Within a short time, the buyout firm
identified several major business issues: (1) transition from corporate subsidiary to a market-
driven business; (2) improvement of inventory and logistics management; and (3) reduction of
corporate overhead. More than one-half of WESCO's 250 branches posted losses in 1993,
contributing to firm-wide red ink totaling more than $3 million on a revenue base of $1.6
billion.
On top of material business issues, WESCO suffered from sleepy management that let the
company drift. The company required a more aggressive team to instill a sense of corporate
mission, repair damaged morale, and improve lackluster performance.
After Westinghouse rejected CDR's initial bid as inadequate, the firm continued to work
on the project. Operating partner Chuck Ames drove the process, identifying a management
plan and preparing to run the company, if necessary. By February 1994, when Westinghouse
came back to CDR, Ames had identified a chief executive, Roy Haley, with the ability to create
and manage the new company.
When CDR acquired WESCO for $330 million, the company lacked basic corporate
infrastructure. Creating information technology, finance, and internal control divisions from
scratch provided the basic building blocks necessary for corporate existence. Implementing the
operating plan crafted prior to acquisition created substantial additional value, moving the
company from losses to meaningful profits.
By 1997, when a financial buyer purchased WESCO, the firm generated $90 million of
operating income on $2.7 billion of revenue. The turnaround in performance produced great
results for CDR. The buyout firm's original $83 million of equity generated proceeds of $511
million, providing annual returns of nearly 47 percent to the firm's limited partners. The
extraordinary results stem from one measure of financial engineering and several measures of
operating improvement.
Few firms possess the skill set required to address the severe operating problems and
company building challenges found at WESCO. By combining operational and financial skills,
CDR exemplifies the potential for unusual value creation.
Buyouts and Inflation
Because buyout valuations correlate strongly with marketable equity valuations, buyouts tend
to exhibit the poor short-term inflation hedging characteristics typical of marketable equities.
That said, since a buyout's more highly leveraged balance sheet contains substantial levels of
fixed rate liabilities, which lose value in an environment of unanticipated inflation, buyouts
may perform somewhat better than less levered companies in an inflationary period.
Alignment of Interests
Investors in buyout funds benefit from structural forces that serve to align the interests of
corporate management and providers of capital. High degrees of balance sheet leverage force
company managers to manage assets efficiently, with energies focused on generating cash flows
to satisfy debt service obligations. The lure of shareholder-unfriendly corporate perquisites
pales in comparison to the specter of default and the grail of profit participation. Buyout
transactions serve to align interests of managers and investors.
Unfortunately, investors in buyout partnerships face the same set of issues that confront
investors in any scheme where the sponsor receives a profits interest. Profit-sharing
arrangements create options that may lead to behavior that benefits the fund operator and
disadvantages the provider of funds. To offset the optionality of the profits interest, substantial
levels of co-investment by the sponsor of the buyout partnership create a symmetry regarding
gains and losses that goes a long way toward keeping interests aligned.
In the ideal world, management fees cover reasonable firm overhead while profits interests
provide attractive incentive compensation. In the real world, excessive management fees, a
particularly acute problem for larger buyout funds, drive a wedge between the interests of the
general partners and the limited partners. Deal fees, which many funds charge upon successful
consummation of a transaction, represent an egregious means by which fund managers enrich
themselves at the expense of their capital-contributing partners. The rationale for deal fees
mystifies thoughtful investors. Since investors pay management fees to compensate the fund
managers for day-to-day work on the fund, what role do transaction fees play? Monitoring fees
represent a similarly superfluous charge. Why do buyout firms assess a fee for monitoring
investments when they already collect a more than adequate management fee? In fact, buyout
funds, particularly large funds that produce fees of hundreds of millions of dollars, represent
an unfortunate example of misalignment of interests between fund managers and investors.
Academic research on fees gives buyout investors pause. Using data on terms for 144
buyout funds formed between 1992 and 2006, Andrew Metrick and Ayako Yasuda of the
University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School estimate that the present value of fees consumes
an average of nearly $20 of every $100 under management. Little wonder that limited partners
so often fail to achieve reasonable returns!
The researchers examine the absolute level and relative size of fixed revenues (management
fees and entry transaction fees) and variable revenues (carried interest, monitoring fees, and exit
transaction fees). The mix between fixed revenues, which buyout mavens pocket simply for
showing up, and variable revenues, which depend on investment performance, further
discourages thoughtful investors. Fully 62 percent of revenues come from fixed fees, leaving
only 38 percent to reward performance. In fact, a portion of fees classified as variable by
Metrick and Yasuda, namely monitoring fees and the exit transaction fee (on the amount for
the original investment), accrue to the general partner in the instance of no investment
performance, painting a dismal picture indeed.18
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the U.S. leveraged buyout industry controlled approximately $342
billion in capital, of which approximately 57 percent was invested in companies with the
remainder committed by investors, but undrawn. More than 360 buyout partnerships were
active in the United States at the end of 2006.19
Summary
Buyout funds constitute a poor investment for casual investors. The underlying company
investments in buyout funds differ from their public market counterparts only in degree of
balance sheet risk and liquidity. The higher debt and lower liquidity of buyout deals demand
higher compensation in the form of superior returns to investors. Unfortunately for private
equity investors, in recent decades buyout funds delivered lower returns than comparable
marketable securities positions, even before adjusting for risk.
Fees create a hurdle that proves extremely difficult for buyout investors to clear. Aside from
substantial year-to-year management fees, buyout funds command a significant share of deal
profits, usually equal to one-fifth of the total. On top of the management fee and incentive
compensation, buyout managers typically charge deal fees and often charge monitoring fees.
The cornucopia of compensation ensures a feast for the buyout manager, while the buyout
investor hopes at best for a hearty serving of leftovers.
As with other forms of investment that depend on superior active management, sensible
investors look at buyout partnerships with a high degree of skepticism. Unless investors
identify top-quartile, or even top-decile managers, results almost certainly fail to compensate
for the degree of risk incurred.
Venture Capital
Venture capital partnerships provide financing and company building skills to start-up
operations with the goal of developing companies into substantial, profitable enterprises.
Providers of funds to venture capital partnerships respond to multiple sources of attraction:
driving an important element of the capitalist system, savoring the glitz surrounding the
celebrity of the venture capital industry, and garnering a share of the gains generated by
entrepreneurial activity.
Part of the attraction of venture capital investing lies in the option-like character of
individual investments. Downside losses cannot exceed the amount invested. Upside gains can
multiply the original stake many fold. The combination of limited downside and substantial
upside produces an investor-friendly, positively skewed distribution of outcomes.
Unfortunately for investors, the promise of venture capital exceeds the reality. Over
reasonably long periods of time, aggregate venture returns more or less match marketable
equity returns, indicating that providers of capital fail to receive compensation for the
substantial risks inherent in start-up investing.
Aside from the dismal picture provided by historical experience, all but the most
longstanding investors in venture partnerships face a problem in adverse selection. The highest
quality, top-tier venture firms generally refuse to accept new investors and ration capacity even
among existing providers of funds. Venture firms willing and able to accept money from new
sources frequently represent relatively unattractive, second-tier (or worse) investment
opportunities.
Prior to the technology bubble of the late 1990s, investors in venture partnerships received
returns inadequate to compensate for the risks incurred. In a few glorious years, the Internet
mania allowed venture investors to share in a staggering flood of riches. Yet the bubble-induced
enthusiasm for private technology investing produced an unanticipated problem for venture
investors. Indiscriminate demand allowed the managing partners of venture funds to increase
the flow of management fees and take a greater share of profits. After the post-bubble collapse,
venture capital partnerships maintained their newly fashioned investor-unfriendly terms,
creating an even higher hurdle for investment success.
Although investing in venture capital partnerships promises participation in the substance
and glamor of backing start-up enterprises, investors providing capital to the venture industry
receive returns inadequate to compensate for the high degree of risk. Only if investors generate
top-quartile, or even top-decile, results do returns suffice to compensate for the risks incurred.
The Glamorous Appeal of Venture Capital
In September 1995, Pierre Omidyar, a French-born Iranian immigrant, started an online
auction site, ostensibly to help his girlfriend sell her collection of Pez dispensers. Even though
by late 1996, the business expanded nicely and produced solid profits, the company's founder
decided to seek outside assistance. Two years after the humble beginnings of the company now
named eBay, Omidyar invited venture capital provider Benchmark Capital to make an
investment and join the board. The then-recently-formed Silicon Valley venture firm made a
$6.7 million investment in Omidyar's eBay, valuing the company at $20 million.
After Benchmark's investment, eBay's growth continued apace, fueled by the engagement
of a new management team headed by the impressive Meg Whitman. The company soon
proved ready for prime-time, as the September 1998 launch of eBay's initial public offering
powered the company's valuation to $700 million. The IPO pricing proved fleeting, as investor
interest drove the first day's price from the offering level of $18 per share to $47 per share,
representing the "fifth-highest first-day gain in the market's history."20 At the close of trading
on September 23, 1998 the market valued eBay at more than $2 billion. Benchmark's $6.7
million investment exploded to more than $400 million, a breathtaking sixty-fold increase in a
little more than a year.
The eBay rocket ship had barely begun its journey. In April 1999, with the stock trading at
$175 per share, the company's market value totaled in excess of $21 billion. Looking to lock in
some of the firm's extraordinary gains, Benchmark Capital distributed a portion of its position
to the limited partners. With Benchmark's $6.7 million investment worth $6.7 billion, the
investment multiple of 1,000 times qualified eBay as "the Valley's best-performing venture
investment ever."21
Far from a flash in the pan, eBay continued to mature, becoming a standard-bearer among
Internet companies. On July 22, 2002, boasting a market capitalization of $15.7 billion, eBay
Joined the ranks of the S&P 500, taking the 104th place, just ahead of the venerable BB&T
Corporation, a North Carolina based financial services concern with a storied past that dated
to the Civil War. On the last day of trading in 2007, eBay's valuation stood at $45 billion,
representing a 2,250 multiple of the valuation assigned to the firm by Benchmark Capital's
original investment.
Everyone made money. Pierre Omidyar, eBay's founder, created wealth beyond
imagination. Meg Whitman, along with the rest of eBay's management and employees,
received a huge payday. Venture capitalists and their financial backers posted staggering
investment gains. Even public shareholders generated significant holding period returns.
Venture capital ruled.
Although eBay stands apart, the venture capital world's other successes, companies such as
Cisco, Genentech, Amazon.com, Starbucks, and Intel, produced enormous gains for
entrepreneurs and investors alike. Even start-ups that ultimately failed, such as @home and
Excite.com, provided opportunities for financial backers to profit as company valuations soared
to multi-billion-dollar levels, before plummeting back to earth.
The Harsh Reality of Venture Capital Performance
Unfortunately for investors, gains from high profile venture-backed successes prove insufficient
to produce acceptable returns on an industry-wide basis. Over long periods of time, venture
investors receive no more than market-like returns with demonstrably higher levels of risk. The
promise of venture capital fails to deliver.
Venture capital partnerships produced a surprisingly low median return of 3.1 percent for
the twenty years beginning in 1985. In contrast, the S&P 500 returned 11.9 percent per
annum. Venture results exhibited a wide dispersion, ranging from 721 percent to -100 percent,
with a standard deviation of 51.1 percent. First quartile results of 16.9 percent provided much
better than median results, while third quartile returns of -6.7 percent significantly impaired
investor capital.22
Venture capital returns proved disappointing, even when measured at the peak of one of the
greatest speculative manias. The 2001 Investment Benchmarks Report reported that a sample of
nearly 950 venture capital funds produced a 19.6 percent rate of return for the twenty-year
period ending December 31, 2000. In absolute terms, the nearly 20 percent per year over
twenty years appears handsome indeed.
Consider, however, if instead of making venture capital investments, investors made
equivalent investments, in timing and in size, in the S&P 500. The marketable security result of
20.2 percent per annum outpaces the composite venture capital return. Even at the point of
maximum return for venture capital, investors in plain-old-large-capitalization common stocks
enjoyed higher returns with lower risks.
Aside from the intuitive conclusion that investors in privately held start-up companies face
materially higher risk than investors in publicly traded large-capitalization corporations, more
rigorous definition of the risk differential proves difficult. Suffice it to say that venture investors
must achieve top-quartile or top-decile results to begin to argue that they achieved superior
risk-adjusted returns.
Franchise Firms
Atop the hierarchy of venture capital partnerships stand a relatively small number of venture
firms that occupy an extraordinary position. This group of eight or ten firms enjoys a
substantial edge over less-exalted practitioners. Top-tier venture capitalists benefit from
extraordinary deal flow, a stronger negotiating position, and superior access to capital markets.
In short, participants in the venture capital process, from the entrepreneur to the investment
banker, prefer dealing with this small set of franchise firms.
In no other area of the capital markets does the identity of the source of funds matter in the
way that it does in the venture capital world. Consider the bond markets. Do the issuers of
government or corporate debt care about the identity of the bondholders? Consider the equity
markets. Do the managements of publicly traded companies care about the identity of the
stockholders? While in certain unusual circumstances, such as in a contested change in
corporate control, issuers of securities may care about the identity of their holders, generally
the name, rank, and serial number of security owners prove of little interest to security issuers.
Consider the real assets markets. Do managers of office buildings, operators of oil wells, or
caretakers of timberlands care about the identity of the owners? Overwhelmingly, the source of
funds for investment purchases matters little or nothing to the individuals responsible for
managing assets.
In contrast, managers of venture-capital-backed enterprises care enormously about the
source of funds. A disproportionate share of entrepreneurs secking start-up financing seek out
venture firms with strong franchises, in the belief that funding from a top-tier firm increases
the odds of ultimate success. General partners of franchise venture firms constitute a truly
extraordinary group, bringing exceptional judgment and unequaled company-building skills to
the board table. Start-up firms benefit from the franchise venture capitalists' accumulated
wisdom, well-established connections, and hard-won investment insights. Thoughtful
entrepreneurs often willingly and knowingly accept a discounted valuation to cement a deal
with a venture capitalist of choice. The reputation of the venture capital elite creates a virtuous
circle in which investment success begets investment success.
Academic research supports the notion of franchise firm performance persistence in the
venture capital arena. Steven Kaplan of the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business
and Antoinette Schoar of MIT's Sloan School of Management find substantial persistence of
fund performance, suggesting that "Igleneral partners whose funds outperform the industry in
one fund are likely to outperform in the next and vice versa." The authors note that their
"findings are markedly different from the results for mutual funds, where persistence has been
difficult to detect. "23 While Kaplan and Schoar identify some persistence in buyout returns,
they find "a statistically and economically strong amount of persistence" particularly in venture
funds.24
Recent entrants to the arena of venture investing, as well as longer-term players with run-of-
the-mill portfolios, face a challenge unique to the venture industry. All of the top-tier venture
capital partnerships limit assets under management and none of the top-tier partnerships
currently accept new investors. Consequently, outsiders remain outside, limiting the available
set of choices for new investors hoping to enter and existing investors hoping to upgrade.
New participants in the venture market must consider the return prospects of venture firms
available for new-money investment. Obviously, industry-wide returns suffer with the removal
of the records of relatively longstanding, relatively large, relatively high performing funds. Since
the available opportunities for the overwhelming number of investors exclude the top-tier
venture firms, return expectations require a commensurate downward adjustment. In the
context of an industry that historically produced returns similar to marketable equity returns,
even a moderate downward adjustment spells trouble. The inability to access the venture clite
drives the final nail in the coffin of prospective venture investor aspirations.
Venture Capital and Inflation
As with any corporate entity, the venture capital investor's claim on the nominal value of
company assets ought to provide a positive correlation to inflation. As with other assets that
exhibit some link to marketable equity prices, the poor short-term relationship between
marketable equities and inflation calls into question the inflation-hedging ability of venture
capital.
Alignment of Interests
Venture funds share with buyout funds and hedge funds the incentive compensation scheme
that creates option-like payoffs for the general partner. A high level of co-investment by the
general partner represents a sure way to align investor interests, creating a salutary symmetry in
general partners' attitudes toward gains and losses. Unfortunately, in the broader venture
world, significant general partner co-investment represents the exception, not the rule.
Interestingly, however, a fair number of the venture capital elite invest substantial amounts of
personal funds side-by-side with their limited partners.
Investment success allows fund sponsors to move the terms of trade in the general partners'
favor. The technology bubble of the late 1990s provides a case in point. Inspired by enormous
investor demand, venture firms raised bubble-cra funds in the neighborhood of ten times the
size of funds raised only a decade earlier, moving from a typical 1990-vintage fund size of $100
million to $150 million to a 2000-vintage fund size of $1 billion to $1.5 billion. Along with the
increase in fund size came an increase in fee income that far out-paced the growth in the size of
the professional staff. The dramatic rise in asset-based income transformed fees from an
overhead recovery mechanism to a partnership profit center.
More distressing to limited partners, venture partnerships used the huge increase in investor
interest in all things technological to extract a greater share of fund profits. Prior to the
technology mania, venture firms operated in a well-defined hierarchy that gave most firms a 20
percent share of profits, a handful of demonstrably superior firms a 25 percent share of profits,
and Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers-the dean of the industry-a 30 percent share of profits.
Elite firms double dipped by creating larger profits and keeping a greater share.
During the Internet bubble, greed prevailed. Seemingly limitless demand for venture capital
investments allowed the rank and file to move their profits interest from 20 percent to 25
percent and the superior firms to move from 25 percent to 30 percent. In an extraordinary act
of selflessness and generosity, Kleiner Perkins, which could have moved its share of profits to 40
percent or even 50 percent, kept its profit share at 30 percent. The general partners of Kleiner
Perkins, while acutely aware of their market power, no doubt decided to leave the firm's profit
share at 30 percent to benefit the institutional missions of the firm's endowment and
foundation investors.
Faced with an opportunity to skew deal terms in the general partner's favor, in spite of the
industry's mediocre record of adding value, venture capitalists reacted with aplomb. In the
aftermath of the bubble, a number of firms reduced fund sizes to more rational levels,
mitigating the negative impact of excessive fees, but instances of funds reducing the profits
interest have yet to come to light. In spite of dismal post-mania venture investment
performance, the ratchet in profits interest appears to work in one direction only.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the U.S. venture capital industry controlled approximately $131 billion
in capital, of which approximately 62 percent was invested in companies, with the remainder
committed by investors, but undrawn. More than 870 venture partnerships were active in the
United States at the end of 2006.25
Summary
Venture capital investments appeal to a wide range of market participants motivated by the
prospects of participating in a fundamental driver of the capitalist system, reveling in the
glamor of high profile start-up successes and benefiting from outsized investment returns. As
illustrated by the case of eBay, venture investing sometimes produces truly breathtaking results.
Unfortunately, eBay's corporate achievements and stock market success stand far apart from
the usual venture investment results. In aggregate, venture investors fare about as well as their
marketable equity counterparts. After adjustment for risk, the overwhelming majority of
venture capital fails to produce acceptable risk-adjusted returns.
The new entrant to the world of private entrepreneurial finance faces an obstacle quite
apart from the barriers hampering investment success in other asset classes. The top tier of
venture partnerships, essentially closed to new money, enjoy superior access to deals,
entrepreneurs, and capital markets. Exclusion from the venture capital clite disadvantages all
but the most longstanding, most successful limited partners.
CONCLUSION
Nontraditional asset classes provide powerful tools for investors who seek to reduce risk by
constructing well-diversified portfolios and to augment returns by pursuing profitable active
management opportunities. Absolute return strategies and real assets holdings add diversifying
power, while private equity investments enhance portfolio return prospects.
Absolute return investments consist of event-driven and value-driven strategies that exploit
mispricings in marketable securities. By offsetting market exposure with hedges, investors
reduce systematic risk and cause results to depend on manager skill. Event-driven positions rely
on evaluation of events associated with corporate mergers and bankruptcies, while value-driven
positions depend on identification of misvalued securities. Because absolute return strategies
generate equity-like returns largely independent of market movements, the asset class
contributes extremely attractive return and diversification characteristics to portfolios.
Yale pioneered the use of absolute return as an asset class, first employing it in 1990. As of
June 30, 2007, inception-to-date returns clocked in at 13.2 percent per annum, with a standard
deviation of only 4.9 percent (relative to the Wilshire 5000's 11.2 percent return and 14.0
percent standard deviation). Absolute return fulfilled its mission of producing uncorr ted
returns, showing monthly correlations of an identical 0.02 with both stocks and bonds.
Real assets protect investment portfolios against unanticipated increases in inflation, with
investors paying a price for real assets' diversifying power by accepting expected returns below
those of marketable equities. Under normal circumstances, high levels of current cash flow
provide a stabilizing influence, reducing the volatility of portfolio fluctuations. From both a
risk and a return perspective, Yale's real assets portfolio succeeded, posting a 17.8 percent per
annum return from inception in July 1978 to June 2007.
Private equity positions enhance portfolio returns at the price of meaningfully increasing
portfolio risk, while producing little in terms of diversifying power. Investor experience over
the past two decades failed to live up to expectations, as funds generally delivered below
marketable equity returns at above marketable equity risk levels. Burdened by extraordinary
fees in the form of substantial profit-sharing arrangements, investors face the difficult task of
selecting top decile funds to realize the promise of private investing,
Strong alignment of interests marks most private equity arrangements, creating an
appropriate set of incentives for fund managers. Significant co-investment by partners of
buyout and venture funds moves investment decisions toward a principal orientation and away
from a potentially damaging agency perspective. Side-by-side commitment of general partners
dollars causes all parties to share in the gains and losses, forcing decision makers to consider the
downside-as well as the upside-of corporate actions. The show of confidence inherent in a
significant general partner co-investment sends a strong signal to potential investors.
Strategies for adding value to corporate operations make private equity an interesting
investment activity, creating the possibility of exploiting less competitive deal-sourcing
environments and identifying operations-enhancing opportunities. To the extent that private
asset managers increase corporate value in a substantial way, investment results exhibit
independence from the forces that drive valuation of marketable equities. Only by adding
significant increments of value do private fund managers begin to earn the extraordinary fees
associated with private equity deals. Strong active management-at the investor level, the fund
level, and the company level-forms the basis for successful private equity programs.
By selecting high quality partnerships that pursue value-adding strategies, Yale University
achieved rates of return in excess of 30 percent per annum on private equity investments over
the thirty years from 1978 to 2007, highlighting the potential contribution to portfolio results
from a well-managed private equity program. Even after adjusting for the higher risk inherent
in venture capital and leveraged buyout participations, Yale's results stack up well relative to
other investment alternatives.
Successful investors in nontraditional asset classes engage in active management, seeking to
identify the highest quality people to manage investment funds. In selecting partners, due
diligence efforts center on assessing the competence and character of the individuals
responsible for portfolio decisions. Developing partnerships with extraordinary people
represents the single most important element of alternative investment success.
I. Absolute return strategies that employ offsetting long and short positions (merger arbitrage and long/short
investing) earn money market returns in the absence of manager value added (or subtracted). On one side of the
portfolio, assume a manager invests contributed funds in long positions. On the other side of the portfolio, assume a
manager executes a short sale. Upon consummating a short sale, the manager receives cash proceeds from the
transaction. Even though the cash must be posted as collateral with the lender of the security, the short seller earns a
"rebate," or money market rate, on the proceeds. If the long position and short position both track the market
precisely, gains (lasses) from the long match losses (gains) from the short, eliminating the systematic market factors
from performance. Under such circumstances, the investor earns the money market like short rebate on invested assets.
II. The story of Farallon Capital Management's handling of the MCI Communications/World Com combination
appears in Harvard Business Case N9-299.020, "Farallon Capital Management: Risk Arbitrage," written by Robert
Howard and Andre Perold in February 1999. The case study describes the ultimately successful efforts of Tom Steyer,
David Cohen, and Bill Duhamel in navigating the complexities of an extraordinary merger transaction.
III. Russell/Mellon Analytical Services produces the manager data used in this section. The Russell 3000 provides the
passive benchmark employed to measure relative performance.
IV. Begin with a gross return of 8.9 percent. Subtract the 1.0 percent management fee, leaving a 7.9 percent return.
Take a 20 percent profits interest (0.2 x 7.9= 1.6) from the remaining return, producing a 6.3 percent net result.
V. The Sharpe ratio, a measure of excess return generated per unit of risk, for Yale's absolute return portfolio amounted
to 1.8 over its seventeen year life. In contrast, passive investments in domestic equities and fixed income posted Sharpe
ratios of 0.9 and 0.7, respectively, over equivalent periods.