5
Asset Allocation
The process of asset allocation illustrates the importance of combining art and science in
investment decision making, as neither informed judgment nor quantitative analysis alone
produces consistently successful results. At one extreme, seat of the pants decisions lack rigor,
omitting some information and either underemphasizing or overemphasizing the information
that remains. At the other extreme, mechanistic application of quantitative tools produces
naïve, sometimes dangerous, conclusions. Marrying the art of seasoned judgment with the
science of numeric analysis creates a powerful approach to allocating portfolio assets.
Defining and selecting asset classes constitute initial steps in producing a portfolio. Many
investors simply allocate among the asset classes popular at the time in proportions similar to
those of other investors, creating uncontroversial portfolios that may or may not address
institutional needs. By relying on the decisions of others to drive portfolio choices, investors fail
to take responsibility for the most fundamental fiduciary responsibility-designing a portfolio
to meet institution-specific goals.
Asset Classes and Fashion
The asset classes from which investors construct portfolios change over time. Snapshots of
Yale's portfolio throughout the past 150 years provide an impression of the evolution of
portfolio structure. Real estate constituted nearly half of the 1850 portfolio, with "bonds and
notes mostly secured by mortgages" and stocks making up the remainder. At the turn of the
twentieth century, dominant asset categories included mortgage bonds, railroad bonds, and
real estate, with relatively small allocations to "stocks in sundry corporations" and "corporation
bonds other than railroad." In the 1950s, the university held domestic bonds, domestic
common stocks, preferred stocks, and real estate. At the turn of the twenty-first century, Yale's
well-diversified portfolio included domestic bonds, domestic common stocks, foreign common
stocks, absolute return, real assets, and private equity.
Just as sartorial styles change, investment fashions cbb and flow. Railroad bonds earned
special consideration in asset allocation discussions in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries because of the dominant role railroads played in the developing U.S. economy.
Investors willingly lent money for hundred-year terms to ostensibly secure rail companies,
knowing that even if a particular concern failed, valuable rail-bed right of way provided
unimpeachable security.
Imagine the surprise of an 1890s-vintage portfolio manager upon learning the fate of the
Lehigh Valley Railroad 41/2's duc 1989. Offered at 1021/2 in January 1891 by the distinguished
syndicate of Drexel, J.P. Morgan, and Brown Brothers, the bonds attracted little notice for the
next four decades as required payments arrived in full and on time. Widespread economic
distress in the 1930s hurt the Lehigh Valley Railroad, leading to relief in the form of the 1938
Debt Adjustment Plan. Initial concessions failed to put the rail line on sound financial footing,
leading to further negotiations that resulted in the 1949 Debt Adjustment Plan. Ultimately,
restructuring proved insufficient to solve the Lehigh Valley's woes, culminating in failure to
meet the October 1, 1970 interest payment. Bondholders, beneficiaries of a first lien on 14.4
miles of track (7.9 miles from Hazle Creek Junction to Hazleton, Pennsylvania and 6.5 miles
from Ashmore to Highland Junction, Pennsylvania) received little comfort from the security
interest, seeing the obligations trade as low as 5 percent of face value in 1972. Although not all
railway debt suffered the fate of the Lehigh Valley bonds, railroad obligations generally failed to
meet expectations.!
Railroad bonds no longer constitute a separate institutional asset class, since the rail industry
proved less enduringly robust than investors of the 1890s believed. With a heavy concentration
in railway debt, late nineteenth century investors allocated relatively little to domestic common
stocks, missing an opportunity to create portfolios with vastly superior return potential.
Twenty-twenty hindsight provides obvious conclusions regarding what would have produced
profits in the past. The basic challenge for investors lies in fashioning portfolios positioned to
succeed in the environment to come.
Investors begin by selecting asset classes and combining them in a way that promises to meet
fundamental investment goals. Institutional portfolios require assets likely to generate equity-
like returns, such as domestic and foreign cquitiès, absolute return strategies, real assets, and
private equities. To mitigate asset-class-specific risks, investors diversify aggressively, holding
assets in proportions that allow the asset class to matter, but not matter too much. By
understanding and articulating the role played by each asset class, investors create a strong
foundation for an institutional investment program.
Asset Class Definition
Purity of asset class composition represents a rarely achieved ideal. Carried to an extreme, the
search for purity results in dozens of asset classes, creating an unmanageable multiplicity of
alternatives. While market participants disagree on the appropriate number of asset classes, the
number should be small enough so that portfolio commitments make a difference, yet large
enough so that portfolio commitments do not make too much of a difference. Committing less
than 5 percent of 10 percent of a fund to a particular type of investment makes little sense; the
small allocation holds no potential to influence overall portfolio results, Committing more
than 25 percent or 30 percent to an asset class poses the danger of overconcentration. Most!
portfolios work well with around a half a dozen asset classes.
Functional attributes play the dominant role in defining asset classes, with structural and
legal characteristics taking secondary positions. Asset class distinctions rest on broad sweeping
differences in fundamental character: debt versus equity, domestic versus foreign, inflation
sensitive versus deflation sensitive, private versus public, liquid versus illiquid. Ultimately
investors attempt to group like with like, creating relatively homogeneous groups of
investments that provide fundamental building blocks for the portfolio construction process.
Fixed income represents an interesting case. If investors want fixed income assets to provide
a hedge against financial accidents, then only high quality, long-terms, noncallable bonds satisfy
the requirement. Although from a legal and structural perspective below-investment-grade
bonds (a.k.a. junk bonds or high-yield bonds) belong to the fixed income family, they lack
important crisis-hedging attributes. Junk bonds contain equity-like risks, as payments depend
mightily on the financial health of the issuer. Even if the high-yield obligor meets contractual
obligations, holders may lose bonds through a mandatory call, as lower interest rates or
improved corporate health allow issuers to redeem bonds at a fixed price prior to maturity.
Ironically, junk bondholders may lose if corporate prospects deteriorate or if they improve! In
any case, below-investment-grade bonds provide little protection against a period of severe
financial distress, since at a time of economic disruption high-yield bondholders might suffer
from a corporate default.
Government bonds dominate portfolios designed to hedge against financial trauma,
providing high quality portfolio protection. Not all Treasury issues make the grade, however.
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities have no place in a properly defined fixed income
portfolio. Traditional fixed income assets respond to unanticipated inflation by declining in
price, as the future stream of fixed payments becomes worth less. In contrast, inflation-indexed
bonds respond to unexpected price increases by providing a higher return. When two assets
respond in opposite fashion to the same critically important variable, those assets belong in
different asset classes.
Many investors include foreign bonds in portfolios as part of a broadly defined fixed income
asset class or as a separate asset class. Neither choice makes fundamental sense. First, foreign
bonds have no role in a fixed income portfolio designed to protect against deflation or financial
trauma. Investors cannot know how foreign bonds might respond to a domestic financial
crisis, since conditions overseas may differ from the environment at home. Moreover, foreign
exchange translations influence returns in a substantial, unpredictable manner. Second, as a
separate asset class, high quality foreign bonds hold little interest. The combination of low,
nai
al
bond-like expected returns and foreign exchange exposure negates any positive attributes
associated with nondomestic fixed income. If investors pay the price (in terms of low expected
returns) by buying bonds for disaster insurance, the payoff must be clear and direct.
Careful investors define asset classes in terms of function, relating security characteristics to
the role expected from a particular group of investments. In the case of fixed income,
introduction of credit risk, call risk, and currency risk diminish disaster-hedging attributes. Yet
in reaching for return or seeking an easy way to beat the benchmark, most institutional
portfolios contain disproportionate allocations to bonds lacking the purity of U.S. Treasury
obligations. The net result leads to a portfolio that meets neither the goal of producing equity-
like returns nor the goal of protecting against market trauma.
Judgment plays a critical role in defining and shaping asset classes. Unless the statistical
analysis employed in the asset allocation process rests on reasonable asset class definitions, the
resulting portfolio stands little chance of meeting institutional needs.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS
Establishing policy asset allocation targets requires a combination of quantitative and
qualitative inputs. Financial markets invite quantification. Return, risk, and correlation lend
themselves to numerical measurement. Statistical methods allow analysis of possible portfolio
combinations through a number of frameworks, including the capital asset pricing model
(CAPM), arbitrage pricing theory (APT), and modern portfolio theory (MPT). Quantitative
analysis provides essential underpinnings to the portfolio structuring process, forcing investors
to take a disciplined approach to portfolio construction. Systematic specification of inputs for
an asset allocation model clarifies the central issues in portfolio management.
Nobel laureates Harry Markowitz and James Tobin developed mean-variance optimization,
one of the most useful and most widely used analytical frameworks. The process identifics
efficient portfolios, which for a given level of risk have the highest possible return or for a given
level of return have the lowest possible risk. Using inputs of expected return, expected risk, and
expected correlation, the optimization process evaluates various combinations of assets,
ultimately identifying superior portfolios. Those portfolios that cannot be improved represent
the efficient frontier, a set of points from which rational investors will choose.
Identifying Efficient Portfolios
The mere phrase mean-variance optimization intimidates many investors, conjuring images of
complicated quantitative methods beyond the grasp of the intelligent lay public. In fact, the
optimization process rests on several basic concepts, accessible to even casual students of
finance.
Mean-variance optimization identifies efficient portfolios. An efficient portfolio dominates
all others producing the same return or exhibiting the same risk. other words, for a given risk
level, no other portfolio produces higher returns than the efficient portfolio. Similarly, for a
given return level, no other portfolio exhibits lower risk than the efficient portfolio. Note that
the definition of efficiency relates entirely to risk and return; mean-variance optimization fails
to consider other asset class attributes.
Practitioners generally assume that normal, or bell-curve-shaped, distributions describe
asset class returns, allowing complete specification of the distribution of returns with only a
mean and a variance. Although using normal distributions facilitates implementation of mean-
variance analysis, real-world security returns include significant nonnormal characteristics,
limiting the value of the conclusions.
Correlations specify the manner in which returns of one asset class tend to vary with
returns of other asset classes, quantifying the diversifying power of combining asset classes that
respond differently to forces that drive returns. Correlation supplies a third means through
which asset class characteristics influence portfolio construction, supplementing the return
and risk factors.
After specifying expected returns, risks, and correlations for the set of investable asset
classes, the search for efficient portfolios begins. Starting with a given risk level, the model
examines portfolio after portfolio, ultimately leading to identification of a combination of
assets that produces the highest return. The superior portfolio takes a place on the efficient
frontier. The process then continues by identifying the highest return portfolio for a range of
risk levels, with the resulting combination of superior portfolios defining the efficient frontier.
At its core, mean-variance optimization is a simple process. Employing specified capital
markets characteristics, a quantitative model uses iterative techniques to search for efficient
portfolios. When considering combinations of assets positioned on the efficient frontier,
investors choose from a superior set of portfolios.
Limitations of Mean-Variance Analysis
Unconstrained mean-variance optimization often provides solutions unrecognizable as
reasonable portfolios. Richard Michaud, in his critique of mean-variance optimization, writes
"[t]he unintuitive character of many optimized' portfolios can be traced to the fact that mean-
variance optimizers are, in a fundamental sense, estimation-error maximizers."... Mean-
variance optimization significantly overweights (underweights) those securities that have large
(small) estimated returns, negative (positive) correlations and small (large) variances. These
securities are, of course, the ones most likely to have large estimation errors." Although
Michaud's comments pertain to a portfolio of securities, his critique applies equally to a
portfolio of asset classes.
Several fundamental problems limit the usefulness of mean-variance analysis. Evidence
suggests that security returns do not correspond to a normal distribution, with markets
exhibiting more extreme events than would be consistent with a bell curve distribution.
Richard Bookstaber, author of A Demon of Our Own Design, states that a "general rule of
thumb is that every financial market experiences one or more daily price moves of four
standard deviations or more each year. And in any year, there is usually at least one market that
has a daily move that is greater than ten standard deviations."31 If extreme price changes occur
substantially more frequently than predicted by a normal distribution, then mean-variance
analysis fails to consider some extremely important information. In fact, investors care more
about extraordinary situations in the tails of the distribution, such as the 1987 stock market
crash, than about ordinary outcomes represented by the heart of the distribution.
The way in which asset classes relate to one another may not be stable. For example, market
crises often cause otherwise distinct markets to behave in a similar fashion. In October 1987,
equity markets all over the world collapsed, disappointing those portfolio managers who
expected foreign diversification to cushion a drop in domestic equity prices. Although
correlations among individual country stock markets before and after October 1987 measured
substantially less than one, the highly correlated behavior of markets in the period immediately
following the 1987 crash caused many investors to wonder what happened to the hoped-for
diversification. Most investors rely heavily on historical experience in estimating quantitative
inputs; yet continuous structural evolution reduces the predictive value of historical returns,
risks, and correlations. Quantitative modelers face the daunting task of assigning an
appropriate weight to historical data and an appropriate weight to well-considered intuitive
projections.
Mean-variance optimization defines return distributions completely in terms of expected
return and risk. The framework fails to consider other important attributes, such as liquidity
and marketability. In fact, the inclusion of less liquid assets in a mean-variance frame-work
raises material issues. Most frequently, mean-variance optimization involves analysis of annual
capital markets data, implicitly assuming annual rebalancing of portfolio allocations. That is, if
stocks have moved above target and bonds below, then on the relevant anniversary date
investors sell stocks and buy bonds in sufficient quantities to restore target allocations. Clearly,
less marketable assets, such as private equity and real estate, cannot be rebalanced in a low cost,
efficient manner. The inability to manage illiquid assets in a manner consistent with model
assumptions reduces the applicability of mean-variance analysis.
Another problem with mean-variance optimization relates to investor time horizon. In
many cases, investors care about multiple objectives that span different time horizons. For
instance, endowment managers seek intermediate-term spending stability even as they pursue
long-term purchasing power preservation. A mean-variance time period of three to five years
might serve the spending stability criterion, while a time period spanning decades might serve
the purchasing power criterion. The almost universally employed one-year time period serves
neither. The rigidity of mean-variance optimization fails to accommodate real-world concerns
of endowment investors.
In the final analysis, both the fundamental shortcomings and the basic attraction of
quantitative methods stem from reducing a rich set of asset class attributes to a neat, compact
package of precisely defined statistical characteristics. Because the process involves materially
simplifying assumptions, unconstrained asset allocation point estimates produced by mean-
variance optimization represent simply a starting point for further work.
Qualitative Judgments
The limitations of mean-variance analysis argue for inclusion of qualitative considerations in
the asset allocation process. Judgment might be incorporated by applying reasonable
constraints to particular asset class allocations. For example, an investor could express a
preference for diversification by limiting any individual asset class to no more than 30 percent
of assets. Such a constraint ensures that no single asset class dominates a portfolio. In addition,
prospective allocations to private equity could logically be limited to a modest increase over the
current allocation. Since illiquidity and lumpiness of opportunities limit prudent expansion of
private equity holdings, incremental changes make sense.
Gradualism represents a virtue in and of itself. Substantial uncertainty surrounds the asset
allocation process. Keynes's "dark forces of time and ignorance" cloud the future, causing even
the most thoughtful estimates of capital markets characteristics to prove unreliable.+ Deciding
to make radical changes based on highly uncertain data places too much weight on a shaky
foundation. Limiting asset allocation changes by constraining asset class movements represents
a sensible modification of the optimization process.
Care must be taken, however, to avoid using asset class constraints simply to fashion a
reasonable-looking portfolio. Taken to an extreme, placing too many constraints on the
optimization process causes the model to do nothing other than to reflect the investor's
original biases, resulting in the GIGO (garbage-in/garbage-out) phenomenon well known to
computer scientists.
Alternatively, investors might identify superior, yet reasonable, portfolios by choosing from
a set of portfolios that lay near (but perhaps not directly on) the efficient frontier. In fact,
unless the current portfolio sits directly on the efficient frontier, a host of alternatives promise
higher expected returns (at the same or lower risk) or lower expected risk (for the same or
higher return). Some of the superior choices likely appear more reasonable than the portfolios
that define the frontier, giving the investor a more comfortable, yet still superior, alternative.
Quantitative modeling proves particularly helpful in focusing investor attention on
potentially rewarding asset allocation changes. By analyzing the existing portfolio using mean-
variance optimization and measuring the degree to which the optimizer prefers to move in a
particular direction, investors understand the relative attractiveness of prospective portfolio
moves. Attractive asset classes strain at the constraints, while unattractive holdings may not
even reach current allocation levels. The degree to which the optimizer "likes" a particular asset
class suggests increasing or decreasing allocations, providing a starting point for qualitative
assessment of the quantitative conclusion. Using informed judgment to modify and interpret
mean-variance results improves the asset allocation process.
CAPITAL MARKET ASSUMPTIONS
Return and risk expectations constitute the heart of quantitative assessment of portfolio
alternatives. While historical experience represents a reasonable starting point, investors seeking
to create truly useful conclusions must move beyond simply plugging historical numbers into
the mean-variance optimizer.
Developing a set of quantitative inputs for portfolio optimization poses some difficult
issues. Most troubling may be the forward-looking nature of the estimates. While past patterns
provide important input for assumptions about the future, historical data must be modified to
produce a set of numbers consistent with expected market realities. Thoughtful investors strike
a balance between respect for history and concern for analytical consistency.
Historical capital markets data require adjustment. Mean-reverting behavior in security
prices implies that periods of abnormally high returns follow periods of abnormally low
returns, and vice versa. Jeremy Grantham, a prominent money manager, believes reversion to
the mean constitutes the most powerful force in financial markets.5 If prices tend to revert to
the mean, then return expectations must be adjusted to dampen expectations for recent high
fliers and boost forecasts for recent poor performers.
Period-specific data frequently suggest counterintuitive conclusions. Relatively risky asset
classes may show returns below those of obviously less risky investments. Assets that have little
in common may move together for no apparent reason. Adjusting assumptions to reflect
appropriate risk and return relationships proves critical to sensible quantitative analysis.
Structural changes in markets force analysts to weight recent data more heavily
deemphasizing numbers posted in previous, sometimes dramatically different, environments.
Introduction of new classes of securities, such as the U.S. Treasury issuance of thirty-year
bonds beginning in February 1977, may alter asset class characteristics in so fundamental a
manner as to render earlier data far less relevant in reaching conclusions regarding future asset
class behavior.
Some practitioners seem daunted by the task of fashioning precise point estimate
predictions of future asset class characteristics. Comfort comes from the realization that great
value stems from producing a set of forecasts with reasonable relative relationships among and
between the various asset classes. Capital markets assumptions with sensible relative
relationships enable identification of a set of useful portfolio alternatives. Even if point
estimates of risk and return variables fail to match the subsequent reality, insofar as inputs stem
from well-grounded interrelationships, the mean-variance optimization process produces
valuable insight into efficient portfolio alternatives.
Unfortunately, point estimates of asset class returns remain necessary for some purposes. In
evaluating the ability of various portfolio combinations to support specified spending
requirements, the precise levels of forecast returns come into play. When deciding whether a
portfolio can reasonably produce returns sufficient to satisfy a 4 percent, 4.5 percent, or 5
percent target rate of spending, fiduciaries face the difficult challenge of relying on forecasts of
future capital markets returns. Fortunately, in the case of evaluating a portfolio's ability to
support a particular level of spending, fiduciaries require reasonably accurate forecasts of long-
term returns, which prove much less daunting than fashioning forecasts of short-term returns.
In mean-variance optimization, data on expected returns provide the most powerful
determinant of results, demanding the greatest share of quantitative modelers attention.
Forecasts of variances place second in importance, while assumptions regarding correlations
prove least crucial. Fortunately, the most intuitive variables-expected returns and variances-
play a more central role in the model than the less intuitive correlations.
Marketable Security Characteristics
Past returns for domestic stocks and bonds provide a sensible starting point for developing
capital markets assumptions, based on the centrality of marketable securities in portfolio
construction and on the availability of a lengthy series of high quality data. Choosing an
appropriate time period poses interesting trade-offs. On the positive side, longer time frames
provide a more robust picture of asset class returns and interrelationships with other asset
classes. On the negative side, a trality of marketable securities in portfolio construction and on
the availability of a lengthy series of high quality data. Choosing an appropriate time period
poses interesting trade-offs. On the positive side, longer time frames provide a more robust
picture of asset class returns and interrelationships with other asset classes. On the negative
side, a long time series includes results from periods with fundamentally different structural
characteristics. For instance, Jeremy Siegel's Stocks for the Long Run begins its study of U.S.
equity and bond market returns with data from the turn of the nineteenth century. During
significant portions of Siegel's study period, the United States was an emerging market, the
Federal Reserve System did not exist, and long-term government bonds were not available.
What relevance do stock and bond returns from the nineteenth century have to expectations
for stock and bond returns today?
Table 5.1 Historical Capital Markets Data Provide a Starting Point for Quantitative
Analysis
Historical Data Inflation Adjusted Using the Higher Education Price Index
U.S.
Bonds
Observations 80
U.S. Developed Emerging
Equity Equity
Equity
21
36
Absolute
Return
17
Private
Equity
25
Real
Assets
25
Cash
80
Arithmetic return
Standard deviation
Growth rate
Expected return
Standard
deviation
2.5%
2.3%
2.0% 6.0%
10.0% 20.0%
1.5%
Expected
growth
Source: Yale University Investments Office.
Table 5.2 Quantitative Model Inputs Rely on Modified Risk and Return Assumptions
Model Data Inflation Adjusted Using Higher Education Price Index
U.S. Developed Emerging Absolute
Bonds Equity Equity
Equity
Equity
U.S.
4.1%
10.6%
22.4%
8.2%
8.3%
22.1%
6.1%
6.0%
20.0%
11.9%
9.9%
12.8%
6.2%
30.0% 8.2% 23.1% 6.8%
8.1% 9.6% 10.9% 6.0%
8.0%
25.0%
5.1%
6.0%
10.0%
5.5%
0.7%
4.0%
0.6%
Private Real
Equity Assets
12.0% 6.0% 0.0%
30.0% 15.0% 5.00%
8.1%
Cash
4.9% 0.1%
Recognizing the arbitrary nature of choosing any particular subset of data to use as a
foundation for estimating future returns, one sensible starting point involves the landmark
Ibbotson-Sinquefield study, first published in 1976.7 Beginning at the end of 1925, the period
contains a sufficient number of observations to provide a rich set of data, but encompasses a
short enough span to limit the impact on markets of significant structural changes.
Using historical data (such as those contained in Table 5.1) as a foundation, sensible
investors build on that base to create a coherent set of capital markets assumptions (such as
those presented in Table 5.2). Since prudently managed endowments consume only post-
inflation returns, all capital markets assumptions reflect an appropriate inflation adjustment.
Domestic Bonds
Domestic bond market returns provide a logical baseline for building a matrix of capital
markets assumptions. Over the long sweep of time, as fixed income investors found returns
croded by spells of unanticipated inflation, bonds provided mediocre real returns of 2.5
percent per annum with risk of 6.8 percent. The October 1979 Federal Reserve decision to
target monetary aggregates instead of interest rates caused bond markets to trade with greater
volatility. Placing more weight on recent experience leads to an assumed expected return of 2
percent with risk of 10 percent.
Marketable Equities
Discussion of the difference in expected returns for bonds and stocks, more succinctly
described as the risk premium, fills many volumes of finance journals. Even while recognizing
the complexities surrounding estimation of the risk premium, asset allocators must deal with
the issue explicitly or implicitly. The historical risk premium of 8.1 percent appears to be
excessive, resulting in large part from the extraordinary performance of U.S. equities over the
past twenty-five years. Moreover, the time series of equity and bond returns suggests that the
risk premium has declined through time. Combining the tendency of a high risk premium to
mean revert with the observation that the equity risk premium seems to decline secularly,
Justifies an assumption for U.S. cquity returns of 6 percent real with standard deviation of 20
percent.
Making appropriate geographic groupings of various national equity markets poses
interesting analytical questions. Approaches range from global to regional to single country. A
global equity asset class fails to recognize the critical contribution that currency movements
make to investment returns, while individual country asset classes create too many variables for
reasonable analysis. Separating domestic equities from foreign allows investors to account for
critical home country characteristics, particularly with respect to currency. A further
distinction between developed and emerging markets groups assets with respect to important
differentiating risk and return characteristics.
Developed economics tend to share similar economic and market fundamentals. In the long
run, stock markets in Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom ought to generate returns
similar to those of the United States, while exposing investors to similar risk levels. Assumed
foreign developed market returns of 6 percent with risk of 20 percent match expectations for
U.S. equities,
Relative to other marketable equities, emerging market equities expose investors to
substantially greater fundamental risks, causing rational investors to expect higher rewards and
higher volatility. Expected real returns of 8 percent compensate holders of emerging market
equities for accepting high levels of risk, represented by a 25 percent standard deviation of
returns.
Alternative Asset Characteristics
Nontraditional asset classes pose interesting challenges to the financial model builder. Unlike
traditional marketable securities, alternative assets exist outside established markets. No
benchmark returns guide investors seeking to model asset characteristics. Past data, limited in
scope, generally describe active manager returns, with results sometimes inflated by
survivorship bias. Without reliable historical information upon which to base forecasts,
investors must produce estimates of expected return and risk by considering alternative asset
classes from a fundamental perspective.
Absolute Return
Absolute return investing, first identified as a distinct asset class by Yale University in 1990,
relies on active management for its very existence. Dedicated to exploiting inefficiencies in
pricing marketable securities, absolute return managers attempt to produce equity-like returns
uncorrelated to traditional marketable securities through investments in event-driven and
value-driven strategies. Event-driven strategies, including merger arbitrage and distressed
security investing, depend on the completion of a corporate finance transaction such as a
merger or corporate restructuring. Value-driven strategics employ offsetting long and short
positions to eliminate market exposure, relying on market recognition of mispricings to
generate returns. Generally, absolute return investments involve transactions with relatively
short time horizons, ranging from several months to a year or two.
From the perspective of the late 1980s, observers might have concluded that absolute return
investing produces returns in the neighborhood of 20 percent per annum. Hedge funds had
produced impressive historical records, showing high returns with low risk and with little
correlation to traditional marketable securities. Yet if investors take no systematic risk, they
deserve a money market rate of return. In an environment with a 4 percent cost of funds, 20
percent returns from a market neutral portfolio imply excess returns of 16 percent! The high
observed returns stem from survivorship bias, a case of past performance raising the profile of
successful firms and causing less successful firms to languish in obscurity. Survivorship-bias-
infected data provide little help in fashioning market forecasts.
Bottom-up evaluation of value-driven absolute return investments leads to better
understanding of future performance. In value-driven transactions, managers often take long
and short positions in marketable equities, eliminating the impact of the market and creating
two opportunities to generate excess returns. Assume a manager in the top quartile in domestic
equities generates 2.6 percent excess returns. If the manager earns the same excess return on
both sides of the portfolio, long and short, gross returns total 8.9 percent, resulting from
adding a 3.7 percent short-term rate of return to a 2.6 percent alpha for long positions and 26
percent alpha for short positions. Based on past experience, producing 2.6 percent excess
returns represents a substantial achievement, suggesting that this analysis relies on aggressive
assumptions. After paying management fees and incentive compensation, the investor nets
approximately 6.3 percent. On a bottom-up basis, justifying return expectations of 20 percent
proves difficult. In fact, the long/short investor needs to produce excess returns of more than
10 percent on both sides of the portfolio to deliver 20 percent net returns to investors.
Producing such performance over extended periods of time would literally put a manager off
the charts.
In the early years of an asset class, historical data suffer from extreme survivorship bias,
causing forward-looking assumptions to differ dramatically from past statistics. In 1997, Yale's
absolute return data, which reflected a combination of actual experience and market returns,
showed a staggering 17.6 percent return with impressively low volatility of 11.8 percent. If
credible, the absolute return numbers indicated returns nearly double those of domestic
equities with a risk level of nearly one half. Yale responded by using a conservative approach to
determine absolute return asset class characteristics, assuming expected returns of 7 percent
real with risk of 15 percent. Even with this substantial adjustment the numbers suggested that
absolute return investments would generate higher returns than domestic stocks with less risk.
As asset classes mature, the issue of survivorship bias wanes. Consultants collect current
returns from a critical mass of participants, reducing the impact of a few attention grabbing
records. With a larger base of managers, the return inflating addition of new entrants' historical
records, a.k.a. backfill bias, plays less of a role. As a result, Yale's current absolute return
assumptions correspond more closely to historical experience, with equity-like real returns of 6
percent and below-equity-like risk of 10 percent.
Private Equity
Private equity includes venture capital and leveraged buyout participations, assets that respond
to market influences in a manner similar to marketable equities. In fact, both venture and
buyout investments resemble high-risk equity assets, raising the possibility of classifying the
private assets with marketable securities.
Private managers pursuing purely financial strategies lay the weakest claim to managing a
separate asset class. In the buyout arena, simply adding leverage to a company's balance sheet
does little to distance the private investment from the public corporation. In the case of
venture investing, a provider of late stage pre-IPO equity finance owns assets nearly identical to
small-capitalization, publicly traded equity securities. Since private investments created
through financial engineering strongly resemble their marketable security counterparts, the
argument for segregating such private assets from public securities rests primarily on
differences in liquidity.
A stronger justification for treating private equity as a distinct asset class stems from value-
added management by investment principals. To the extent that venture capitalists contribute
to the process of bringing a company from an idea with no revenues to a reality with tens of
millions of dollars in revenues, value creation occurs independent of market activity. A buyout
specialist who produces meaningful operating improvements generates similarly noncorrelated
returns. Superior opportunities for value creation, combined with liquidity and structural
differences, support treatment of private equity as a distinct asset class.
Historical data provide limited guidance in fashioning forwardlooking capital markets
assumptions. Infrequent marks-to-market cause private assets to appear less volatile than the
underlying reality. Startup companies held in a venture capitalist's partnership receive only
occasional valuations, leading to relatively low levels of observed risk. Subsequent to an initial
public offering, when a company begins day-to-day trading, measured volatility increases
dramatically. Obviously, truc risk tends to decrease as companies mature, suggesting that the
observed volatility level understates risk for privately held assets. Historical data on buyout
returns suffer from the same problem of unnaturally low levels of observed historical risk. The
combination of infrequent reporting and market insensitive valuation policies serve to disguise
true risk levels.
Guidance for specifying private equity risk and return attributes comes from the expected
relationship with marketable equity investments. Illiquidity and higher risk in private assets
demand a substantial premium over domestic equity's expectations of 6 percent returns with
20 percent risk. Assuming that private equity investments generate 12 percent returns with a
risk level of 30 percent represents an appropriately conservative modification of the historical
record of 12.8 percent returns with a 23.1 percent risk level.
Real Assets
The real assets category includes real estate, oil and gas, and timber-land, which share the
common characteristics of sensitivity to inflationary forces, high and visible current cash flow,
and opportunity to exploit inefficiencies. Real assets provide attractive return prospects,
excellent portfolio diversification, and a hedge against unanticipated inflation.
Despite important similarities, the three subasset classes differ from one another, showing
only modest correlations, as supply of and demand for each depends on fundamentally
different factors. For example, recent history indicates that oil and gas investments exhibit
negative correlation to real estate and timber. Such diversification within real assets helps to
produce steady returns through a variety of economic environments.
Real estate constitutes the core of Yale's real assets portfolio with a weight of 50 percent.
Real estate markets provide dramatically cyclical returns. Looking in the rearview mirror in the
late 1980s, investors rushed into real estate lured by returns that dominated those for
traditional stocks and bonds. A few years later, after the market collapse, those same investors
saw nothing other than dismal prospects for real estate. Poor returns nearly eliminated interest
in real estate as an institutional investment asset. Reality lay somewhere between the extremes
of wild enthusiasm and deep despair.
Real estate embodies characteristics of both debt and equity. Lease payments, the
contractual responsibility of tenants, resemble fixed income obligations, while the property's
residual value contains equity-like attributes. In extreme cases, real estate investments become
nearly bond-like. For example, properties subject to long-term, triple-net leases provide cash
flows that resemble bond coupon payments. In contrast, some real estate consists almost
entirely of residual value. For example, hotel properties, with daily leases, provide nearly pure
equity characteristics. Most real estate falls in the middle of the continuum, containing
elements of debt and equity.
Oil and gas investments range from relatively conservative reserve purchases to relatively
risky wildcat drilling. The real assets class focuses on acquisitions of producing properties,
because in place cash flows assure inflation sensitivity. The riskier exploration activities belong
in the private equity arena, at least until reserves are discovered (or not).
Oil and gas reserves generate extraordinary cash flows as production depletes reservoirs,
causing investors to receive a combination of return on capital and return of capital. The
reserve cash flows exhibit extremely high correlation to published energy prices, although
variations in geography and quality produce differentials.
Timber investments round out the real assets trio. Although timber shares the characteristic
of inflation sensitivity with real estate and oil and gas, because timber plays less of a role in the
general economy, timber prices exhibit less correlation with general price levels. Financially
astute timber owners manage holdings on a sustainable basis, cutting the amount of wood
produced each year through biological growth. When managed on a sustainable basis, the
productive capacity of the forest remains intact, preserving value across generations.
Sustainable forest management does not require lockstep harvesting of a single year's
biological growth. If timber prices appear to be relatively low, the cutting program can be
curtailed, deferring current year harvests to future years. In fact, the forestland owner receives a
bonus in the form of an additional year's biological growth as the payment for patience. Pay for
patience in the timber arena contrasts with the depletion characteristic of oil and gas
investments.
Real assets returns might be expected to fall between the expected return for stocks and the
expected return for bonds, consistent with the expectation that real assets risk falls between
that for stocks and that for bonds. In fact, inefficiencies in pricing of real assets argue for higher
expected returns, suggesting parity in return expectations for real assets and for stocks and
leading to an assumption of 6 percent real returns.
As in the case of absolute return data, historical real assets volatility numbers require
modification. With marketable equity risk at 20 percent and bond risk at 10 percent, observed
real assets risk of 6.8 percent seems inconsistent with the asset class's fundamental
characteristics. Because real assets data come predominantly from infrequently conducted
appraisals, reported returns fail to capture true economic volatility. Not only does infrequent
sampling reduce opportunity to observe price fluctuations, the appraisal process tends to
perpetuate whatever biases influenced past appraisals. Expected real assets risk of 15 percent lies
between bond risk of 10 percent and stock risk of 20 percent. Developing capital markets
assumptions by evaluating fundamental asset class characteristics allows investors to create a
reasonable framework for portfolio assessment independent of cyclical market conditions.
Correlation Matrix Assumptions
The correlation matrix is the most difficult set of mean-variance optimization variables to
specify. Less intuitive than either means of variances, correlations indicate the degree to which
asset class returns tend to move with one another.
Considering the relationship between bond and stock returns in various economic scenarios
highlights the difficulties in specifying correlations. Under normal circumstances, bond returns
exhibit high positive correlation to stock returns. When interest rates fall, bond prices rise as a
result of the inverse relationship between prices and yields. When interest rates decline, stock
prices tend to rise as investors subject future earnings streams to lower discount rates. Strong
positive correlations between stocks and bonds in normal environments produce little
diversifying power.
In the case of unanticipated inflation, bonds suffer. Inflationary price increases crode
purchasing power of fixed nominal bond payments, causing investors to push bond prices
down. While inflation may have negative short-term consequences for stocks, in the long run
stocks react positively to inflation. With unexpected inflation, the long-term correlation
between stocks and bonds proves to be low, providing substantial diversification to the
portfolio.
Table 5.3 Historical Correlation Matrix Provides a Starting Point for Defining the
Relationship Between Asset Classes
U.S.
Historical Correlation Matrix
Developed
Bonds Equity
Emerging Absolute
Equity
Return
U.S.
Equity
U.S.equity 1.00
U.S. bonds 0.01
Developed 0.58
equity
1.00
0.04 1.00
0.22 10.57
1.00
Emerging 0.40
0.11
equity
Absolute return 0.69
Private equity 0.41
Real assets
Cash
0,38 10.27
0.17
-0.12
1.00
0.01
0.10
-0.06 0.50
Sourver Historical Data Sources: U.S. Equity: 70 percent weight on the S&12500 (1926-2005) plus 30 percent weight
on the Russell 2000 (1979-2005) or DFA Small Companies Deciles 6-10 (1926-1978). US Bonds Lehman Brothers
Government Bond Index (1973-2005) and Ibbotson Intermediate Term Government Bond Index (1926-1972).
Developed Equity: MSCI EAFE Index. Emerging Equity: DFC Emerging Markets Index (1985-1997), MSCI
Emerging Markers Free (1998-2003) and MSCI Emerging Markets (2004-2005). Absolute Return: Weighted Average
Composite of Cambridge Associates' Data (1989-1993) and Tremont composite indexes (1994-2005). Private
Equity: Cambridge Associates. Real Assets: Cambridge Associates and NCREIF
0.53
0.32
0.07
-0.15
Private
Equity
1.00
0.61
-0.22
10.09
Reall
Assets
1.00
0.13
-0.18
1.00
0.06
Cash
In a deflationary environment stocks perform poorly as economic woes cause earnings to
suffer. In contrast, bonds generate handsome returns since fixed payments appear increasingly
attractive as price levels decline. During periods of deflation, low or negative correlation
between stocks and bonds provides strong diversification.
The fundamentally different behavior of stock returns and band returns in environments of
met and unmet inflationary expectations poses a conundrum to the financial modeler. Should
the expected nondiversifying correlation apply or should the unexpected diversifying
correlation apply? The fact that investors care more about the diversifying role of bonds in
unexpected (particularly deflationary) circumstances magnifies the dilemma.
Data specification techniques for quantitative models evolve over time. When Yale began
using mean-variance optimization in 1986, the university employed unadjusted historical data
for risk, return, and correlation assumptions. Calendar year 1986 returns provided a wakeup
call. When the time series of data incorporated the S&P 500 return of 18.5 percent and the
EAFE return of 69.9 percent, relative historical returns moved in favor of foreign equities.
Recognizing the perversity of assuming that what has done well will continue to do well, in
1987 the Investments Office modified expected return data to create an internally consistent set
of return assumptions. In 1988, risk levels underwent the same type of judgmental scrubbing
that had been applied to return data the year before. Finally, in 1994, the Investments Office
adjusted the correlation matrix to reflect the staff's informed judgments regarding expected
correlations. Table 5.3 shows an unadjusted set of historical data and Table 5.4 depicts Yale's
modified set of correlation assumptions. As investors accumulate experience with
implementing quantitative models, the process becomes more intuitive, increasing the richness
of the analysis and conclusions.
Table 5.4 Modified Correlation Matrix Reflects Assumptions About Future
Interrelationships
Modified Correlation Matrix
U.S.
Equity
€1.00
0.40
0.70
U.S.
Bonds
0.60
U.S.equity
U.S. bonds
Developed
equity
Emerging
equity
0.25
0.15
0.15
0.20
0.60
0.10
Absolute return 0.30
Private equity 070
Real assets 0.20
Cash
0.10
0.50
0.00
Source: Yale University Investments Office.
1.00
0.25
Developed
Equity
0.20
1.00
0.75
Emerging Absolute
Equity
Return
1.00
0,20
0.25
CL15
0.00
1.00
0.20
0.15
0.35
Private
Equity
1.00
10.30
0.00
Real
Assets
1.00
10.30
Cash
1.00
A reasonable set of capital markets assumptions serves as the basis for serious quantitative
portfolio analysis. Developing sensible relative relationships produces a group of efficient
portfolios, helping investors select superior asset allocation strategies. The more difficult-to-
estimate specific levels of future returns provide necessary input in assessing the capacity of
portfolios to support specified spending levels. A thoughtful set of capital markets assumptions
contributes to a rigorous disciplined framework for the analysis of fundamental investment
issues.
Misuse of Mean-Variance Optimization
Despite mean-variance optimization's potential for making a positive contribution to portfolio
structuring, dangerous conclusions result from poorly considered forecasts. Some of the most
egregious errors committed with mean-variance analysis involve inappropriate use of historical
data. Consider allocations to real estate in the late 1980s. Real estate provided extremely strong
returns during the 1980s with relatively low volatility and relatively low correlation to
traditional marketable securities. Not surprisingly, naive application of mean-variance analysis
led to recommendations of extraordinary allocations to real estate.
The spring 1988 Journal of Portfolio Management study by Paul Firstenberg, Stephen Ross,
and Randall Zisler, "Real Estate: The Whole Story" concluded that institutional allocations to
real estate should be increased dramatically from the then current average of under 4 percent of
portfolio assets. The authors based their conclusions on data showing government bonds with
returns of 7.9 percent and risk (standard deviation) of 11.5 percent, common stocks with
returns of 9.7 percent and risk of 15.4 percent, and real estate with returns of 13.9 percent and
risk of 2.6 percent. Although, for purposes of their study, the authors increased real estate risk
levels from historical levels to more reasonable levels, their mean variance results were anything
but sensible. Efficient portfolio mixes included between 0 and 40 percent in government
bonds, between 0 and 20 percent in stocks, and between 49 and 100 percent in real estate.
Fortunately, the authors tempered their enthusiasm in taking the "pragmatic perspective...
that pension funds should seek initial real estate allocations of between 15 to 20 percent."8
The mean-variance optimizer favored real estate because of past high returns, past low risk,
and past low correlation with other asset classes. The return expectation for real estate exceeded
that for stocks by 4.2 percent. Although historical real estate risk levels measured only 2.6
percent standard deviation of returns, Firstenberg used a valuation model to justify increasing
risk levels to 11.3 percent, slightly below the assumed volatility of government bonds. The
authors' favored real estate time series showed negative correlation with both domestic stocks
(-0.26) and government bonds (-0.38). When the highest returning asset class exhibits the
lowest risk and negative correlation with other asset classes, mean-variance optimizers reach the
obvious conclusion.
The fundamental flaw in the Firstenberg study stems from failure to examine critically the
real estate capital markets assumptions. Why should real estate be expected to return more than
stocks and bonds? Why should real estate have lower risk than stocks and bonds? Why should
real estate exhibit negative correlation with stocks and bonds? Real estate contains
characteristics of both debt and equity. The stream of contractual lease payments resembles
fixed income, while the residual value shows equity-like characteristics. Hence, return and risk
expectations logically flow from and fall between those for stocks and bonds. Similarities in
factors driving valuations of real estate and traditional marketable securities lead to the
conclusion that correlations might be expected to be positive, albeit less than one. Instead of
focusing only on adjusting the risk level of real estate, Firstenberg and his co-authors should
have adjusted return and correlation levels as well.
Had an investor followed the Firstenberg advice and overweighted real estate in 1988,
portfolio results would have disappointed because both stocks and bonds dramatically
outperformed real estate in subsequent years. From 1988 to 1997, real estate returned an
annualized 4.4 percent with stocks and bonds generating annual results of 18.0 percent and 8.3
percent, respectively. When relying on historical data, after a bull market run, asset classes
appear most attractive just when future prospects prove bleakest.
Investors relying on historical data in cyclical markets invite whipsaw. In the early 1990s,
after a period of disastrous real estate performance, the asset appeared less appealing as poor
results were incorporated into past returns. Investors employing the Firstenberg approach
increased real estate holdings in the late 1980s and avoided real estate investments in the early
1990s, buying high and selling low. In the deeply cyclical real estate market, historical data
suggest high allocations at market peaks (when returns have been high and risks low) and low
allocations at market troughs (when returns have been low and risks high). Past returns provide
perverse signals to backward looking investors.
TESTING THE ALLOCATION
For many investors, defining the efficient frontier represents the ultimate goal of quantitative
portfolio analysis. Choosing from the set of portfolios on the frontier ensures that, given the
underlying assumptions, no superior portfolio exists. Unfortunately, mean-variance
optimization provides little useful guidance in choosing a particular point on the efficient
frontier. Academics suggest specifying a utility function and choosing the portfolio at the
point of tangency with the efficient frontier. Such advice proves useful only in the unlikely
event that investors find it possible to articulate a utility function in which utility relates solely
to the mean and variance of expected returns.
Identifying a set of a mean-variance-efficient portfolios fails to finish the task at hand. After
defining the efficient frontier, investors must determine which combination of assets best
meets the goals articulated for the endowment fund. Successful portfolios must satisfy the two
goals of endowment management: preservation of purchasing power and provision of
substantial, sustainable support for operations. To assess the ability of a portfolio to meet these
goals, creative modelers fashion quantifiable tests.
Preserving purchasing power represents a long-term goal. Endowed institutions promise
donors that gifts to endowment will support designated purposes in perpetuity. Evaluating
success or failure in meeting the endowment preservation goal requires a long-term measure,
spanning generations. For example, Yale quantifies failure to maintain endowment value as
losing one-half of purchasing power over fifty years.
Providing stable operating budget support represents an intermediate-term goal. Because
university operations require stable sources of support, dramatic short-term declines in
endowment income prove difficult to accommodate. Yale defines spending trauma as a 10
percent reduction in real endowment distributions over five years.
The quantitative descriptions of failure to maintain purchasing power and failure to
provide spending stability necessarily vary from institution to institution. In fact, the metrics
may change over time. In the late 1980s, when Yale began using quantitative tools to assess
portfolio efficacy, the endowment provided approximately 10 percent of revenues. At that
time, Yale defined spending trauma as a 25 percent real decline over five years. As the
importance of the endowment to the budget grew, the consequences of a material decline in
endowment spending grew commensurately. In 2001, when the endowment provided
approximately one-third of revenues, the university redefined spending trauma as a 10 percent
real decline in revenues over five years.
Unfortunately, a clear, direct trade-off exists between preserving purchasing power and
supplying stable support for operations. Although obvious challenges preclude fashioning
precisely equivalent measures of failure to preserve endowment assets and failure to provide
stable operating budget support, obtaining rough equivalence between the two measures
proves helpful in evaluating trade-offs between the two goals. The challenge for fiduciaries lies
in selecting the portfolio best suited to satisfy, to the extent possible, both goals. Quantitative
performance tests facilitate portfolio choice.
Simulating the Future
Once goals have been articulated and quantified, statistical simulations provide a mechanism
for evaluating investment and spending policies. Investors begin with a spending policy,
specifying a target rate and an averaging process. The spending policy remains constant as
various investment portfolios undergo the simulation process.IV
Simulations employ the capital markets assumptions developed for the mean-variance
optimization. Returns for each asset class, based on assumed returns, risks, and correlations
and drawn from the specified distributions, determine portfolio returns for the initial period.
The spending rule dictates the amount withdrawn from endowment, leaving the residual to be
invested in the second period. After rebalancing the portfolio to long-term policy weights,
repeating the return generating process provides data on endowment value and spending level
for the subsequent year. The process continues, creating a time series of spending and
endowment values.
The simulation process described above creates one specific path, a far-from-robust test of
portfolio characteristics. To increase the information content of the test, analysts conduct
literally thousands of simulations, providing reams of data on future spending and endowment
levels. The collective results produce a vivid picture of the future, allowing calculation of
probabilities of failure to preserve assets and failure to provide stable budgetary support.
Interpreting the simulated results requires a combination of quantitative and qualitative
judgment. Some portfolios fall from consideration on the basis that they are dominated by
portfolios that have lower probabilities of failing to meet each of the goals. Other portfolios fail
because they skew too much toward satisfying one goal at the expense of the other. Once
investors eliminate clearly inferior portfolios, decision makers assess the qualitative trade-offs
between reducing risk on one measure while increasing risk on another. In the final analysis,
portfolio selection involves careful subjective assessment of trade-offs between conflicting goals.
One significant benefit of running simulations lies in the direct link between the
quantitative analysis and the goals articulated for endowment management Mean-variance
optimization, run in isolation, produces a set of efficient portfolios. The fund manager, faced
with a set of efficient combinations of assets, chooses between them with little idea which
portfolio might best address the fund's needs. How should investors choose between Figure
5.1's portfolio A with an expected return of 5.75 percent and standard deviation of 10.0
percent, and portfolio B with an expected return of 7.1 percent and standard deviation of 14.5
percent? Economists might suggest that a utility function be employed to identify the
appropriate asset allocation. Since few market participants would have any idea how to specify
such a function, this technique proves remarkably unhelpful.
In contrast, simulation data address directly the issue facing fiduciaries, describing the trade-
off between the conflicting goals of endowment management. Figure 5.2 shows the set of
choices identi through a program of simulations. In selecting either portfolio A with 28.4
percent probability of a disruptive spending drop and 29.6 percent probability of long-term
purchasing power impairment, or portfolio B with 24.9 percent probability of a disruptive
spending drop and 27.0 percent probability of purchasing power impairment, investors express
preferences on the trade-off between two goals central to an endowment's mission. Instead of
wondering about the impact on institutional goals of a mean-variance efficient portfolio with
certain expected risk and return characteristics, simulations allow investors to examine the
degree to which spending and investment policies serve articulated goals. Simulations build on
the foundation of mean-variance optimization, allowing direct assessment of goals identified by
fund fiduciaries.
Figure 5.1 Mean Variance Optimization Fails to Provide Clear Guidance to Decision-
Makers
Expected Return (mare)
13%
7.0%
4.2%
Pur
5.3%
3P%
Spending Drop (DSD)
Portfolio A
Expected Retum= 5.75%
Standard Deviation - 100%
80% 100%
30.0%
26.
20.04
21.5%
Source: Yale Investments Office
Figure 5.2 Simulations Allow Decision Makers to Understand Trade-Off's Between
Critical Goals
24.0%
27.3%
279%)
20%
11.06
zaurs
12.0% 131%
Standard Deviation
Portfolio B
DSD Probability = 24.9%
PPI Probability = 27.0%
25.05
Portfolio D
Expected Return = 7.1%
Standard Deylation=14.3%
27.4%
340%
150%
2405
Probability of Purchasing Power Imprint (PPT)
Partiolie A
DSD Probability - 20.4%
PPT Probabiry-206%
K
16 0%
50%
Source: Yale Investments Office
Simulations liberate mean-variance analysis from another of its practical limitations: the use
of a single, frequently one-year investment period. Forward-looking simulations address the
problem by allowing the use of any desired time frame. The intermediate-term issue of
providing stable operating budget support can be analyzed in an intermediate-term context.
The long-term issue of preserving purchasing power can be evaluated in a long-term context.
By employing simulations, the mean-variance abstraction of a set of portfolios that provide the
highest expected return for a given level of risk gives way to concrete measures of the degree to
which portfolios meet investor goals.
Results of Disciplined Portfolio Management
The use of quantitative tools makes a difference. For example, Figure 5.3 shows the
improvement in Yale's portfolio from 1985 to 2005 as the university applied quantitative asset
allocation techniques to endowment management. The improvements in expected spending
stability and prospective purchasing power preservation came in spite of three increases in the
spending rate.
Some observers question the robustness of conclusions based on a set of institution-specific
capital markets assumptions. While far from dispositive, examining the results of portfolios
managed using mean-variance optimization provides some insight into the answer.
Among college and university endowments, Yale, Harvard, Princeton, and Stanford have a
particularly long history of using quantitative portfolio management tools. Although minor
variations in conclusions result from differences in data inputs and investment preferences
among the four institutions, specific portfolio recommendations tend to be supported by all
four sets of assumptions. As illustrated in Table 5.5, the independently derived sets of capital
markets assumptions produce reasonably similar results.
The largest university endowments pursue asset allocation strategies dramatically different
from those of other educational institutions. Yale, Harvard, Princeton, and Stanford exhibit
substantially greater diversification than the average endowment. Domestic equities dominate
most endowment portfolios, averaging 42 percent of assets, while the better-diversified large
institutional portfolios commit only 15 percent to domestic equities. Domestic bonds account
for 20 percent of the average endowment's portfolio in contrast to an allocation of 11 percent
by Yale, Harvard, Princeton, and Stanford. Private assets, including venture capital, leveraged
buyouts, real estate, timber, and oil and gas, which barely register among the broad group of
educational institutions and account for less than 10 percent of assets, play an important role
for the major endowments with an allocation of 40 percent. Disciplined quantitative modeling
techniques encourage investors to create well-diversified portfolios.
Figure 5.3 Yale Reduces Spending Volatility and Risk to Purchasing Power
U.S. equity
U.S. bonds
Foreign equity
Absolute return
Probability that Haal Vale of
Endowment Halves in Pilty Years
Private equity
Real assets
Cash
US
1PM
11%
20%
Source: Yale University Investments Office.
Table 5.5 Large University Endowments Pursue More Diversified Investment
Approaches
Target Asset Allocation, Expected Return, and Standard Deviation of Yale, Harvard, Princeton,
and Stanford Universities, Compared to University Mean, June 30, 2006
Yale Harvard Princeton Stanford
12% 15%
4
21
15
15
25
12
25%
Probability of 100% Real Spending Drog Over Year Perled
0
6.9%
118
Expected return
Standard deviation
Source Yale University Investments Office
13
29
$
6.3%
11.7
12%
7
25
20
12.1
20%
12
15
20
10
23
10
6.2%
11.3
Mean
15%
11
16
21
15
25
-1
6.6%
114
CONCLUSION
Endowment Mean
42,6
20
15
11
4
5
2
5.5%
13.2
The largest university endowments pursue higher return strategies, causing expected returns
for the funds to exceed the average by 1.1 percent, a substantial increment relative to the
broader group's expected return of 5.5 percent. In spite of producing greater expected returns,
large institution portfolio risk levels actually fall below risk estimates for the less well-diversified
endowments. Employing rigorous quantitative portfolio analysis contributes to the
construction of diversified, high-return portfolios.
Built on the philosophical principles of equity orientation and diversification, asset allocation
decisions provide the framework that supports creation of effective investment portfolios.
Placing policy allocation targets at the center of the investment process lends a measure of
stability to funds invested in an uncertain world.
Purely statistical descriptions of various asset allocation alternatives provide little guidance
for decision makers. The widely used Markowitz mean-variance optimization process produces
a set of efficient portfolios, fully described by two parameters: expected return (mean) and
expected risk (standard deviation). Academics identify optimal portfolios by specifying an
institutional utility function that produces a point of tangency with the mean-variance
efficient frontier. Even in the unlikely event the academic approach proves helpful, decision
makers wonder how the chosen portfolio will interact with the institution's spending policy.
A number of problems implicit in most applications of mean-variance analysis limit its
usefulness in evaluating portfolios. Incorporating sensible qualitative considerations into the
asset allocation process represents a critical factor in reaching reasonable conclusions. Informed
judgment plays a significant role in selecting and defining asset classes, as well as in constructing
a coherent set of capital markets assumptions. Combining powerful quantitative tools and
sensible qualitative decisions provides a starting point for asset allocation decisions.
The use of simulations to test portfolios created through mean-variance optimization allows
assessment of the effectiveness of investment and spending policies over appropriate time
horizons. Employing the same capital markets assumptions used in mean-variance analysis, the
simulations allow examination of longer time frames, consideration of interaction between
spending and investment policies, and translation of statistical capital market and portfolio
characteristics into relevant quantitative criteria for decision makers.
Failure to achieve investment goals defines portfolio risk in the most fundamental way.
Goals, and risks following therefrom, must be described in a manner allowing investment
fiduciaries to understand trade-off's between various portfolios. By evaluating portfolios in
terms of probabilities of maintaining purchasing power and providing stable spending streams,
fiduciaries understand and choose among alternatives defined in the context of criteria directly
relevant to institutional objectives.
Portfolios generated through a combination of mean-variance optimization and forward-
looking simulation suffer from a number of limitations. The results depend on assumptions
regarding future returns, risks, and covariances. While precise levels of return estimates are
certain to be wrong, much of the power of the analysis stems from evaluating casier-to-assess
relative relationships. If the quality of the capital markets return and risk assumptions
represented the greatest hurdles, conclusions reached through quantitative analysis would be
quite robust.
More serious problems stem from instability in the risk and covariance characteristics of
asset classes. The tendency of markets for risky assets to move together in times of crisis reduces
the value of diversification, at least in the short run. Questions regarding the nature of
distributions of securities returns and the stability of relationships between asset classes pose
serious challenges to quantitative modeling of asset allocation. Nonetheless, the process of
quantifying portfolio analysis provides discipline lacking in less rigorous approaches to
portfolio construction.
A systematic, quantitative portfolio construction process lies at the heart of portfolio
management activity, providing a disciplined framework within which qualitative judgments
inform portfolio decisions. By recognizing and affirming the centrality of policy asset allocation
targets, fund managers sensibly focus on the most powerful investment management tool.
Ultimately, thoughtful asset allocation work provides the basis for building a successful
investment program.