9
Asset Class Management
Active managers compete in an extremely tough arena, since markets tend to price assets
accurately. Enormous sums of money deployed by highly motivated investors seck to exploit
perceived mispricings at a moment's notice. Winning at the game of active management
requires great skill and, perhaps, more than a little good fortune. Serious investors consider
carefully the certain results of low cost passive management before opting for the uncertain
returns of high cost active management.
Significant costs raise the hurdle for active strategies. Identifying a portfolio that merely
beats the market fails to define success, as managers must build portfolios that beat the market
by a sufficient margin to cover management fees, transactions costs, and market impact.
Because of the leakage of fees and costs from the system, a staggeringly large percentage of
money invested in marketable securities falls short of producing index-like returns.
Overcoming the costs of active management presents a formidable challenge.
In the context of an extraordinary complex, difficult investing environment, fiduciaries tend
to be surprisingly accepting of active manager pitches. Institutions all too often pursue the
glamorous, exciting (and ultimately costly) hope of market-beating strategies at the expense of
the reliable, mundane certainty of passive management. Instead of examining critically the
factors that drove past performance, investors frequently simply associate superior historical
results with investment acumen.
Because of the nearly insurmountable hurdles in beating the market, prudent investors
approach active strategies with great skepticism. Beginning with the presumption that markets
price assets correctly places the burden of proof on the manager who promises risk-adjusted
excess returns. Only when compelling evidence suggests that a strategy possesses clear potential
to beat the market should investors abandon the passive alternative.
Active managers worth hiring possess personal attributes that create reasonable expectations
of superior performance. In selecting external managers, investors must identify individuals
committed to placing institutional client goals ahead of personal self-interest. Alignment of
interests occurs most frequently in independent investment management firms run in an
entrepreneurial fashion by energetic, intelligent, ethical professionals. Engaging investment
advisors involves consequences beyond issues of financial returns, as fiduciaries entrust both
the institution's assets and reputation to the external management firm.
Even after identifying a promising investment management firm, the job remains
uncompleted until the investor and advisor negotiate satisfactory deal terms. The fundamental
goal in establishing contractual arrangements consists of aligning interests to encourage
investment advisory agents to behave as institutional fiduciary principals. Slippage between
what the investor wishes and what the advisor does imposes substantial costs on institutions,
reducing the likelihood of meeting basic investment goals and objectives.
THE GAME OF ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
The thrill of the chase clouds objectivity in assessing active management opportunities. Playing
the game provides psychic rewards, generating grist for the mill of cocktail party conversation.
Keynes likens active investment to children's entertainment: "For it is, so to speak, a game of
Snap, of Old Maid, of Musical Chairs-a pastime in which he is the victor who says snap
neither too soon nor too late, who passes the Old Maid to his neighbor before the game is over,
who secures a chair for himself when the music stops. These games can be played with zest and
enjoyment, though all the players know that it is the Old Maid which is circulating, or that
when the music stops some of the players will find themselves unscated."! Fiduciaries must
ensure that active management leads to higher expected portfolio returns, not just higher
investment manager job satisfaction.
The willingness to believe t superior performance comes from intelligent hard work
clouds clear judgment. The investment world worships success, deifying the market scer du
Jour. Instead of wondering whether a manager at the top of the performance charts made a
series of lucky picks, observers presume that good results stem from skill. Conversely, in public
perception, poor results follow from lack of ability. Market participants rarely wonder whether
high returns came from accepting greater than market risk, or whether low returns resulted
from lower than market risk. The investment community's lack of skepticism regarding the
source and character of superior returns causes strange characters to be elevated to market guru
status.
Joe Granville
Of all the individuals who moved markets with their predictions, Joe Granville may be among
the strangest. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the technical analyst made a series of "on the
money" predictions. Strikingly, on April 21, 1980 when the market fell to a two-year low of
759, Granville issued a buy signal, anticipating a powerful rally that took the average over 1000
within three months. In January 1981, Granville's next major market call, a sell signal,
prompted "waves of selling," causing markets to decline sharply on record volume. The next
day his picture appeared on the front page of the New York Times, while Washington Post
headlines read "One Forecaster Spurs Hysteria-Markets Sink in Panic Selling."Granville
predicted he would win the Nobel Prize, crowing that he had "solved the 100-year enigma,
calling every market top and bottom."
Granville's technically driven forecasts came replete with costumes and props. His routine
included dressing as Moses to deliver the Ten Commandments of investing, dropping his
trousers to read stock quotations from his boxers, and appearing on stage in a coffin filled with
ticker tape.
Such antics did nothing to diminish his following. In late 1981, markets fell worldwide,
sometimes in apparent response to Granville's calls. According to Rhoda Bramner of Barron's
"while Granville strutted across the investment stage, the market pretty much followed his
bearish script."2
Unfortunately for Granville, he missed the turn of the market in 1982. Stubborn
bearishness kept his followers out of the early stages of one of history's greatest bull markets. In
a crucl twist of fate, Granville turned "wildly bullish" prior to the 1987 crash. As a result, a
1992 study by Hulbert's Financial Digest concluded that Granville ranked last among an
undistinguished group of investment newsletter writers, down 93 percent over the twelve-year
period.
Joe Granville's one-time prominence in the investment world provides evidence of the
investing public's association of superior returns with investment skill. Granville's
methodology relied on technical factors with absolutely no predictive power. Yet he moved
markets, fooling large numbers of people into following his absurd predictions.
The Beardstown Ladies
In the early 1990s, the Beardstown Ladies captured the investing public's attention. Based on
an impressive historical record of beating the S&P 500 by 8.5 percent per year for the ten years
ending in 1993, the matrons of Beardstown parlayed their success into a lucrative writing and
lecturing career. Their first book, The Beardstown Ladies Common-Sense Investment Guide:
How We Beat the Stock Market-And How You Can Too, sold more than 800,000 copies. The
group followed with four more books, The Beardstown Ladies' Pocketbook Guide to Picking
Stocks; The Beardstown Ladies' Guide to Smart Spending for Big Savings: How to Save for a
Rainy Day Without Sacrificing Your Lifestyle; The Beardstown Ladies Stitch-in-Time Guide to
Growing Your Nest Egg: Step-by-Step Planning for a Comfortable Future, and Cookin' Up Profits
on Wall Street. The Beardstown empire, which in addition to books included lectures, videos,
and cassettes, rested on the public's belief in the solid foundation of the Beardstown Ladies'
extraordinary investment success.
All of the hoopla surrounding the Beardstown Ladies met with relatively little skepticism.
Assertions of superior performance provided prima facie evidence of the efficacy of their
investment approach. No further analysis needed.
Unfortunately, the Beardstown Ladies possessed so little analytical ability that calculating
investment returns challenged their capabilities. Because the investment club's treasurer erred
when using a computer program, she reported a two-year return as applying to a ten-year
period. In fact, upon critical examination, the extended record of reported strong relative
performance turned out to be worse than mediocre. Figures compiled by Price Waterhouse
concluded that the Beardstown Ladies produced returns of only 9.1 percent per annum, falling
short of the S&P 500 return by 5.8 percent per year and failing to meet previously reported
results by a staggering 14.3 percent per year. In short, the investment record merits not even a
modest magazine article.
The fundamental lesson from the Beardstown Ladies' saga relates to the attitude investors
take toward performance records, Markets price securities efficiently enough that when
presented with a superior performance record, the initial reaction ought to be that strong
performance most likely resulted from a series of favorable draws from the distribution of
potential outcomes. Only when managers articulate a compelling, coherent investment
philosophy should fiduciaries begin to consider the active management opportunity.
Jim Cramer
Jim Cramer deserves a prominent place in the pantheon of investment anti-heroes. Educated at
Harvard College and Harvard Law School, Cramer squanders his extraordinary credentials and
shamelessly promotes stunningly inappropriate investment advice to an all-too-gullible
audience.
Cramer made a name as an unabashed cheerleader for tech stocks during the Internet
bubble. He rationalized the purchase of absurdly valued securities by asserting that the
professionals "got it wrong" and the public is "much, much smarter than you realize."3 Near
the peak of the market in January 2000, Cramer articulated six "commonsensical rules" that
allow the "average individual" to "routinely beat the professionals." Included in his list of rules
were "buy stocks of companies you like," "buy expensive stocks," and "buy stocks that move in
chunks." Cramer's inane rules proved perfectly timed to inflict the maximum damage to his
readers' portfolios.
Cramer never minces words. He described the "momentum/growth camp" as a group of
investors that would rather buy stocks that have both earnings and technical momentum,
regardless of price. In other words, it doesn't matter how expensive they are, as long as they
execute. "5 Not content simply to promote an irresponsible momentum strategy amid a market
bubble, Cramer took the then long-suffering value managers to task. He registered palpable
contempt for the "value/contrarian camp," contending that "denial is the basis of the value
thesis." He accused value investors of exhibiting "systematic blindness to all things tech,"
chiding Warren Buffett for his "preposterous" preference for "Coke over Microsoft."6
In February 2000, Cramer wrote about the arrogance of value mutual fund managers,
lamenting that "InJot only do they have the guts to tell us that we are wrong to own our Ciscos
and our Yahoo's, they also insist that they are the only authority on what to buy." Cramer
asserted that value managers holding Philip Morris "should have to answer to their dereliction
of duty and added that "the worst are the managers who bought the Cokes and Pepsis..." He
followed with a piece of advice for mutual fund investors in "growth-turned-value stories":
"Take control. Fire these guys.
Of course, Cramer's advice missed the mark by a wide margin. In the year following the
publication of his anti-value rant, Coke gained 10 percent, Pepsi, 36 percent and Philip Morris,
a stunning 171 percent. Meanwhile, Cramer's favorites collapsed, with Cisco down 57 percent
and Yahoo! declining by a staggering 84 percent.
If Cramer's early 2000 preference for Cisco and Yahoo! over Philip Morris and Coke laid
waste to his adherents' portfolios, his calls on the grocery business destroyed even more valuc.
In February 2000, Cramer suggested that "the death knell for value investing may very well be
sounding right now because of technological innovation." He asserted that old economy grocer
Albertsons was "being hit by a fundamental paradigm shift," which will only get worse as
Urban Fetch, Kozmo and Webvan expand." Cramer unequivocally placed his bet on Internet-
cra firms.
Nine months after Cramer's prognostication, Fetch discontinued its consumer delivery
business. Even though Kozmo never executed its hoped-for public offering (sparing Cramer's
readers an opportunity to lose money), the firm managed to muddle through until April 2000
when it ceased operations. Webvan, which boasted a market capitalization of more than $5
billion at the time of Cramer's February 2000 call, filed for bankruptcy in July 2001.
Meanwhile, Albertsons, the dinosaur doomed to extinction, posted profits of more than $500
million on nearly $38 billion of 2001 revenues. Ultimately, on May 30, 2006 Albertsons
succumbed to a takcover by a group led by SuperValu. Scorekeepers note that from the time of
Cramer's misguided, top-of-the-market advice to the date of merger consummation,
Albertsons returned an annualized 0.5 percent per annum, beating the S&P 500's 0.2 percent
per annum and trouncing the NASDAQ's-9.1 percent per annum.
In spite of Jim Cramer's massively misguided top-of-the-market advice, in March 2005,
CNBC gave him his own TV show, Mad Money. On Mad Money, Cramer makes a mockery
of the investment process, throwing chairs, shoving toy bears in meat grinders, wearing
sombreros, and decapitating bobble-head dolls (made in his own likeness). Betwixt and
between his sophomoric antics, Cramer throws out hundreds of stock recommendations. In
fact, according to an August 2007 Barron's article, a database covering six months of Cramer's
picks contained an astounding 3,458 stocks. Barron's concludes that "the credible evidence
suggests that the telestockmeister's picks aren't beating the market. Did you really expect more
from a call-in host who makes 7,000 stock picks a year?" To make a dismal story worse, Cramer
failed to beat the market in spite of a post-broadcast surge of an average of 2 percent for his
picks. Barron's negative assessment would be even more dire were transaction costs and taxes
included.
Aside from Cramer's unsurprising inability to choose thousands of stock market winners in
any given year, he seems to have admitted to market manipulation when he ran a hedge fund in
the late 1990s. In a December 23, 2006 interview with Wall Street Confidential, Cramer flat
out said "... a lot of times when I was short at my hedge fund... I would create a level of
activity beforehand that could drive the futures." He further noted that "it doesn't take much
moncy...." In the interview he goes on to describe ways to manipulate the prices of individual
stocks. 10 According to Barron's, Cramer later "said he'd only been talking hypothetically."11
Surely the Harvard-educated Cramer, who served a stint as editor in chief of the Harvard
Crimson, knows that there is nothing hypothetical in the clause "when I was short at my hedge
fund. Does Jim Cramer need a lesson in the subjunctive?
Joc Granville, the Beardstown Ladies, and Jim Cramer provide compelling evidence that
market participants frequently and uncritically accept simple prominence as proof of sound
underlying investment strategy. The falls from grace suffered by Joe Granville and the
Beardstown Ladies (and perhaps a future fall from grace for Jim Cramer) should encourage
investors to adopt skeptical attitudes when evaluating active management opportunities.
PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Real estate investors invoke the mantra "location, location, location." Sensible investors seeking
to engage an active manager focus on "people, people, people." Nothing matters more than
working with high quality partners.
Integrity tops the list of qualifications. Aside from the fact that moral behavior represents a
fundamentally important standard for human interaction, working with ethical advisors
increases the likelihood of investment success. Choosing external advisors of high integrity
reduces the gap between the actions of the advisors and the interests of an institutional fund.
Inevitable differences exist between the interests of an endowment and an outside money
manager. The more profound issues might include differences in financial goals, time horizon,
tax status, and various forms of business risk. Regardless of the structure of contractual
arrangements, external advisors tend to respond to personal incentives. Employing individuals
with high moral standards reduces the severity of conflicts of interest, as ethical managers
consider seriously the goals of the institutional client when resolving conflicts.
Loyalty plays an important part in investment management relationships, allowing longer
term thinking to dominate decision making. In the best of circumstances, the interdependence
of institutional investors and external advisors creates a spirit of partnership, enhancing
opportunities to create successful, lasting relationships.
Loyalty flows both ways. Investors owe external advisors the opportunity to pursue
investment activities within a reasonable time frame. Firing a poorly performing manager
simply to remove an embarrassing line item from a quarterly investment report fails t meet the
test of reasonableness. Likewise, an investment advisor abandoning reliable partners simply to
pursue a lower cost source of capital follows a short-sighted strategy.
Obviously, loyalty does not require permanent maintenance of the status quo.
Relationships between fiduciaries and external managers come to an end for a variety of
compelling reasons. Far too frequently, however, investors abandon good partners for trivial
reasons, imposing unnecessary costs and needlessly disrupting portfolio management activities.
Investment advisors and institutional fund managers operating with a presumption of loyalty
enhance opportunities for long-term success.
Top-notch managers invest with a passion, working to beat the market with a nearly
obsessive focus. Many extraordinary investors spend an enormous amount of time
investigating investment opportunities, working long after rational professionals would have
concluded a job well done. Great investors tend to have a "screw loose," pursuing the game not
for profit, but for sport. Markets fascinate successful investors.
The best investors care about risk. Diligence and hard work take an investment manager
only so far, as even the most carefully researched decisions ultimately face the vicissitudes of
market forces. Because so much lies beyond a portfolio manager's control, superior investors
seek to know as much as can be known, limiting uncertainty to the irreducible minimum. Well-
researched investment ideas tend to be the least risky, since, as Yale's great economist Irving
Fisher observed, "risk varies inversely with knowledge."12
Moncy provides an obvious motivation, bringing enormous wealth to successful investment
advisors. Yet money managers seeking to maximize income constitute a poor group from
which to choose. Profit maximizing business plans involve unbridled asset growth and
unimaginative benchmark hugging strategies, factors at odds with investment success.
Appealing money managers limit assets under management and make aggressive,
unconventional security choices, incurring substantial risks for their money management
business with the hope of generating superior investment returns.
Warren Buffett produced his own set of desirable money manager characteristics in a March
2007 announcement of the search for his successor as Berkshire Hathaway's chief investment
officer:
Picking the right person(s) will not be an easy task. It's not hard, of course, to find smart
people, among them individuals who have impressive investment records. But there is far
more to successful long-term investing than brains and performance that has recently
been good.
Over time, markets will do extraordinary, even bizarre, things. A single, big mistake
could wipe out a long string of successes. We therefore need someone genetically
programmed to recognize and avoid serious risks, including those never before
encountered. Certain perils that lurk in investment strategies cannot be spotted by use of
the models commonly employed today by financial institutions.
Temperament is also important. Independent thinking, emotional stability, and a
keen understanding of both human and institutional behavior is vital to long-term
investment success. I've seen a lot of very smart people who have lacked these virtues.
Finally, we have a special problem to consider: our ability to keep the person we hire.
Being able to list Berkshire on a resume would materially enhance the marketability of an
investment manager. We will need, therefore, to be sure we can retain our choice, even
though he or she could leave and make much more money elsewhere. 13
Even Warren Buffett worries about losing a colleague to a better economic opportunity!
Due diligence on the principals of an investment management organization provides critical
input into the manager selection process. Spending time with manager candidates, both in
business and social settings, allows assessment of whether the manager exhibits characteristics
of a good partner. Questioning individuals on manager-supplied reference lists confirms or
negates impressions gathered in the due diligence process. Contacting people not included on
an official reference list, including past and present colleagues, competitors, and others,
provides opportunities to evaluate the quality of a prospective manager's business dealings and
integrity level.
In the intensely competitive investment management arena, only a small percentage of
managers overcome the enormous burden of fees to post market-beating records. Identifying
members of the small group that will prove to be successful requires an intense focus on
personal characteristics. Only the best of the best will succeed.
ORGANIZATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
The right people tend to create the right organization, reinforcing the centrality of selecting
strong partners. However, finding great people, while necessary, marks only a starting point in
the search for a money manager, for strong people in a poorly structured organization face the
markets with a significant, unnecessary handicap. In a world rich with alternatives,
compromising on structural issues makes little sense.
Attractive investment management organizations encourage decisions directed toward
creating investment returns, not toward generating fee income. Such principal-oriented
advisors tend to be small, entrepreneurial, and independent.
Size and Client Base
Appropriate size depends on the nature of the investment opportunity. In general, smaller
tends to be better. Market size matters little when trading highly liquid securities such as U.S.
Treasury bonds and large-capitalization domestic equities. Of course, such markets provide few
opportunities to generate excess returns. Interesting active management situations reside in
smaller, less liquid markets, requiring managers to exercise discipline in limiting assets under
management.
Constraints related to the number of clients limit rational firm growth as severely as do
constraints related to asset size. While routine communication might be conducted through
broad-based mailings or by client service personnel, informed clients inevitably require
meaningful amounts of an investment principal's time and energy. An investment advisor
opting for less involved, less burdensome clients makes a potentially serious mistake. First, high
quality clients occasionally provide useful input into the investment process. Second, in the
event that the firm experiences an explicable stretch of poor performance, high quality clients
continue to support the manager's activities. Less sophisticated clients control unreliable
money, oftentimes exhibiting pro-cyclical tendencies, buying high, selling low, and introducing
instability into the investment management operation.
A strong client base creates advantages for both the investment advisor and the clients
themselves. If a money management firm's client roster contains "weak hands," temporary
poor relative performance might cause substantial asset withdrawals. Such withdrawals harm
other clients directly, in the case of transactions costs spread among participants in
commingled funds, and indirectly, in the case of client defections leading to poor firm morale.
In contrast, intelligently supportive clients contribute financial and emotional support to
investment managers experiencing a rough stretch of performance. By adding assets to an
underperforming manager's account, the client stands to profit from a future reversal of
fortune, while the manager benefits from the client's vote of confidence.
Entrepreneurial Attitude
Small, independent firms operate on the opposite end of the spectrum from large subsidiaries
of financial services conglomerates. Appropriate firm size and sensible ownership structures
contribute to superior investment results. The tendency of smaller, principal-oriented firms to
behave in an entrepreneurial fashion provides critical context to the investment management
process. Entrepreneurial environments emphasize people, putting them ahead of bureaucracy
and structure. By placing people first, investment organizations increase chances for success.
In entrepreneurial organizations, individuals drive decisions, placing great importance on
selecting partners with attractive behavioral characteristics. Great people provide the core of a
strong entrepreneurial operation, according to venture capitalist Len Baker, because they
"execute better, respond better to surprise, and attract other great people." He suggests that
managers "be out there, be obsessive, and be bottom up."14
Entrepreneurial capitalism rests on three driving forces: innovation, ownership, and
adaptation. Each characteristic contributes to successful money management organizations.
Innovation
According to Schumpeter, innovators "see things which only subsequently prove to be true."15
By building an investment process that promotes foresight, investment advisors lay the
groundwork for success. Excess returns stem from out-of-the-mainstream positions that
subsequently achieve recognition, often in startling surprise to ordinary market observers. By
identifying the unexpected consequence before the fact, successful investment managers realize
superior returns from exploiting superior insights. Without creative portfolio choices,
investment managers face dismal prospects, since the old combination represents the consensus
view. Market efficiency drives returns on market-like portfolios to the average, causing
conventional portfolios with conventional ideas to produce conventional results, a poor
outcome for active investment managers.
In efforts to innovate, entrepreneurs encourage experimentation, accepting occasional
shortfalls as the price paid for potential gains. Repeated failure precedes success in many
entrepreneurial endeavors, requiring an organizational culture that encourages
experimentation and accepts mistakes. By explicitly permitting failure, but holding down its
costs, investment organizations create an environment allowing managers to construct truly
novel, high-potential investment portfolios.
Ownership
Financial and psychic ownership leads to superior results. Strong investment management
firms reward contributions monetarily while engaging the hearts and minds of staff members.
Widely distributed ownership enhances organizational stability, facilitating long-term thinking.
Carefully structured financial incentives elicit appropriate behavior from investment
personnel, discouraging fee-driven activity and encouraging return-generating behavior.
Psychic ownership provides a powerful complement to financial rewards. By causing investors
to "buy in" to the process, interests of manager and client come together.
Adaptation
Adaptation involves careful selection, amplifying the strong and eliminating the weak. In
choosing a portfolio of attractive positions from a large universe of potential opportunities,
successful investors express unusual insights ahead of the herd. Strong ideas command
meaningful portions of assets, magnifying the impact of high conviction positions, while weak
positions disappear. When circumstances change, managers reconfigure portfolios to reflect
new realities. Not only does adaptation influence the tactics of security selection, but as
markets evolve, adaptation may lead to new investment strategies. If inefficiencies disappear in
a particular niche, the entrepreneur leaves the unattractive market and secks new mispricings to
exploit. Both tactically and strategically, adaptation plays an important role in money
management.
Contrast the flexibility of entrepreneurial organizations with bureaucracies. Bureaucratic
structures deal effectively with repetitive, regular, slow-to-change environments. Control-
oriented processes emphasize structure, subordinating the role of people. Bureaucracies employ
conventional wisdom and seek consensus, punishing failure quickly and ruthlessly. By
pursuing safety and avoiding controversy, bureaucratic structures systematically screen out the
market opportunities likely to yield superior returns. Bureaucracies deal poorly with constantly
changing market environments and fail to address even clementary active investment
management problems.
Many bureaucratic functionaries pursue investment with "name brand" money managers,
reducing career risk by choosing widely recognized firms blessed by an external consultant.
Large, process-driven entities that produce consistent results provide a safe haven for the timid
client. Well-respected firms develop franchises, using their good name to attract and retain
assets. In the realm of marketable investments, the franchise provides no benefit to the
portfolio management process. The value of the franchise lies solely in the comfort level
provided to clients.
Comfortable investment decisions fail to generate exciting results. Discomfort represents a
necessary, albeit not sufficient, condition of success. Because entrepreneurial firms tend to be
newer and smaller, track records may be harder to define and interpret. Less process-driven
strategies depend heavily on individuals, reducing the fiduciary's ability to rely on the franchise
for results. While backing an entrepreneurial group takes more courage than serving up a
"name brand" recommendation, investment success may require backing managers without
standard institutional credentials.
Unfortunately, once-attractive investment partners sometimes mature into unattractive
bureaucracies. Schumpeter's concept of creative destruction takes hold, as organizations evolve
from small entrepreneurial "craft shops" to large enterprises with characteristics that
undermine the premise that supported forming the firm in the first place. As the organization
grows, mutation "... incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within,
incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one."16 Institutional acceptability
threatens the very characteristics that made the firm interesting in the first place. As time and
size crode the entrepreneurial enthusiasm that brought initial success to the firm, the fund
manager needs to reject the old partners and seek new partners to provide superior
management capabilities. The process of creative truction, which Schumpeter concludes is
"the essential fact about capitalism," poses challenges for investment management
organizations. 17
Investment Guerrillas
Miles Morland, formerly general partner of Blakeney Management, captured the essence of the
strengths of an entrepreneurial investment management organization in a letter describing why
he did not proceed with a contemplated Joint venture involving a much larger financial services
conglomerate. Blakeney manages assets in Africa and the Middle East.
I am afraid we are not going to go ahead with our merger.... Blakeney is a small group
of guerrillas. Our success comes from our ability to fight and forage in places too small
and too risky for people with more to lose. That is also what makes it such an
exhilarating place to work. We are focused completely on getting and doing business
with no thought for our supply lines or on whose territory we are trespassing. [Your
firm] is a big and powerful uniformed army. Thanks to you it has retained its
entrepreneurial spirit more than any other large American firm but that is like saying
that the parachute troops are more entrepreneurial than the tank battalions. Big firms by
their nature need disciplines and chains of command. Their sheer size means that when
they venture overseas they build complex relationships with other powers in other lands
who speak the same language.....
Guerrillas cannot be integrated into the regular army without losing what it is that
makes them effective. All the professionals at Blakeney have previously been officers in
the regular army and have deserted to join the guerrillas. It is the thought that you
personally are a guerrilla at heart that has made us go on with the negotiations despite
the warning signs. If we ask ourselves how will this deal help us do more and better
business, and how will it make our lives more interesting and more fun, we cannot find
an answer. Everything points in the opposite direction. This is no criticism of [your
firm] or the excellent people we have gotten to know there. It is the reality of forming an
affiliation with someone as big as you. Even if we don't have to put on uniforms we will
have to run our business in a way that acknowledges the rules that are imposed on you
and when we go foraging for business we will have to respect your existing alliances. We
are rustlers by nature not herders. We want to make lightning raids in Zimbabwe and
Ghana and Egypt while your partners... are holding meetings to decide... about how
and where they are going to deploy their mighty troops. When they arrive we hope they
will find a few of the local cattle are missing.
... I hope we can continue to do things together. All this only started because of the
respect I have for you personally. I bear the blame for not realizing sooner what the
implications of the deal were. At the end of the day, we might have been the majority
shareholder and you the minority one, but if a majority mouse lics down with a minority
clephant it is not the elephant who is going to end up as a pancake.
By selecting investment managers with an entrepreneurial orientation, fiduciaries improve
the chances for investment success. Large, multiproduct, process-driven firms face the daunting
hurdle of overcoming bureaucratic obstacles. Small, focused, independent firms with excellent
people provide the highest likelihood of identifying the contrarian path to excellent investment
results.
Independent Organizations
Investors increase the degree of coincidence of interests with fund managers by choosing to
work with focused, independent firms. Particularly severe conflicts between investor goals and
money manager actions arise in "financial supermarkets"-large, bureaucratic organizations
that offer a variety of investment management options. Employees at financial conglomerates
turn over at substantially greater rates than at independent firms. Compensation explains part
of the reason. The investment management subsidiary's revenues flow to the financial
supermarket, which takes some as profit and returns some as salary to the subsidiary's
principals. Successful portfolio managers employed by supermarkets have the option of simply
moving across the street, opening up shop, and garnering 100 percent of the revenues
associated with their efforts. The profit objective of the financial supermarket creates instability
at the investment management subsidiary, opening a gap between the interests of the firm and
the client. A desire for independence explains another part of the reason for high employee
turnover. The opportunity to operate without interference from bureaucrats intent on serving
corporate interests appeals to the best investment minds. Ill-informed, outside intervention in
the decision-making process, however well-intentioned, creates the potential for suboptimal
outcomes and provides incentive to establish an independent firm. A final motivation comes
from a sense of ownership. Owner operators simply work harder and better than rank-and-file
employees. Small, independent, entrepreneurial organizations provide greater coincidence of
interest between firm and client.
Investment focus improves the chances of satisfying client objectives. A narrow product line
forces managers to live and die by investment results, creating an enormous incentive to
produce superior returns. In contrast, a firm with a broad product line anticipates that hoped-
for gains on winning products more than offset inevitable losses on losing strategies, reducing
the cost of any single product failure. Even worse, in secking steady streams of income, financial
supermarket managers fashion broadly diversified portfolios, tracking market benchmarks
closely enough to avoid termination and too closely to achieve excellence. Investors prefer that
fund managers place all their eggs in one basket, and watch that basket with great care. By
selecting concentrated, focused managers, investors increase chances for success.
In pursuing stable flows of revenues, financial conglomerates seek income growth at the
expense of investment performance. Investment managers soon recognize that rewards come
primarily from attracting new cash flows, not generating superior investment returns. Since
size is the enemy of performance, asset gatherers win at their clients' expense.
Public ownership of an investment management organization introduces another set of
issues for the firm's clients. While the goals of a privately held financial supermarket differ
materially from the interests of the money management clients, in the case of a publicly owned
money manager the introduction of outside shareholders further exacerbates the conflicts of
interest. The most obvious, and perhaps the most severe, problem concerns the conflict of
interest between money management clients and external shareholders.
Fortress Investment Group
When an independent investment management firm files to go public, the offering documents
contain clues regarding the consequences for owners of the firm, their clients, and the public
shareholders-to-be. But, offering documents frequently fail to address head-on the
fundamental conflict that arises from introducing public shareholders into the mix. In the
context of a private firm, the investment manager accepts the responsibility to provide superior
investment results to clients that entrust assets to the investment manager's care. In the context
of a public firm, the investment manager retains the responsibility to serve the clients' interests
and adds a responsibility to public shareholders. The interests of the clients and the public
shareholders often conflict.
The public offering of shares in the Fortress Investment Group, a $26 billion manager of
private equity partnerships, hedge funds, and publicly traded alternative investment vehicles,
highlights the issues confronting a publicly traded firm's clients. Take the case of dividends.
The November 2006 registration statement proudly notes that "unlike many publicly traded
asset managers, we intend to pay out a significant portion... of our annual distributable
earnings in the form of quarterly dividends. "18 Substantial dividends clearly benefit
shareholders. In contrast, investors in Fortress's asset management products suffer from the
firm's dividend policy.
Consider the source funds for dividend payments. The most reliable income stream
comes from the management fees that Fortress charges for asset management services. Higher
fees and increased assets under management benefit the public shareholder. Neither higher fees
nor increased assets benefit the clients of the Fortress funds. In fact, both factors produce lower
investment returns. To add insult to injury, some portion of the fees paid by Fortress's clients
go not to the principals making the investment decisions, but to faccless public shareholders.
The issue of dividend payments highlights the conflict between clients and shareholders.
In an attempt to justify the public offering, the offering statement includes a helpful section
entitled "Why We Are Going Public," that contains the headers People, Permanence, Capital,
and Currency. With respect to "People," Fortress suggests that publicly traded shares would
"increase our ability to provide financial incentives to our existing and future employees."19
The Fortress statement ignores the obvious fact that public shareholders claim a portion of the
funds that otherwise would have been available for distribution to the firm's investment
professionals. A public offering diminishes the size of the compensation pool, making
Fortress's claim disingenuous at best.
Regarding "Permanence," Fortress expects to benefit from an increase in the proportion of
capital that institutions and individuals allocate to the firm. No evidence exists that capital
providers prefer publicly traded firms to privately held firms. In fact, if capital providers seek
high risk-adjusted returns, the fundamentals support the opposite conclusion.
As to "Capital" and "Currency", Fortress suggests that publicly traded shares facilitate the
firm's ability to grow, create new investment products, and finance future strategic
acquisitions. Increases in assets and numbers of products may well benefit Fortress principals
and public shareholders, but do nothing to serve the interests of the clients of Fortress funds.
Strangely absent from the list of reasons to go public is "Greed." Just prior to the IPO, on
December 18, 2006 the Fortress principals (five in number) sold 15 percent of the firm to
Japanese securities firm Nomura "for approximately $888 million, all of the proceeds of which
went to the Principals. "20 Moreover, between September 30, 2006 and the consummation of
the IPO, the Fortress S-1 registration statement noted that "we distributed $528.5 million to
our principals. "21 In addition, careful readers who make it to page 80 of the offering circular
note that shortly prior to the initial public offering, the principals of Fortress entered into a
$750 million credit agreement, which provided funds for refinancing a prior $175 million
credit facility and for "investment in various existing and new Fortress Funds, and to make a
one-time $250 million distribution of capital to our principals,"22 Finally, in a tangle of
complexity that only a lawyer could love, the registration statement describes a "tax receivable
agreement," which might produce payments to the principals that "could be material in
amount. "23
Between the $888 million Nomura windfall, the $528.5 million of pre-IPO distributions,
and the $250 million loan distribution, the five principals of Fortress cashed in to the tune of
$1,666.5 million. Finding the three elements of the Fortress principals' paydays required careful
reading of pages and pages of legalistic prose in the company's disclosure documents. In a
straightforward world, the section entitled "Why We Are Going Public" would contain one
header, "Greed," that transparently outlined the $1.7 billion of payments to the fortunate few.
The Fortress IPO clearly benefits the senior principals of the firm and just as clearly imposes
costs on both the Junior Fortress professionals and the firm's clients. By giving a piece of the pic
to outside shareholders and by cashing out themselves, the senior principals leave far less to
compensate their subordinates. By introducing a responsibility to serve the interests of public
shareholders, Fortress creates a conflict with their fiduciary obligation to clients. Public
offerings of money management firms benefit the few at the expense of many.
United Asset Management
United Asset Management (UAM), a once-acquisitive conglomerate of investment advisors,
illustrates the problems with external ownership of investment managers. At the end of 1998,
with equity interests in forty-five firms and managing in excess of $200 billion, UAM ranked
among the world's largest owners of investment management firms. While the firm boasted an
impressive level of assets under management, UAM operated with a fundamentally flawed
strategy.
The UAM investment manager roster included a number of well-known, highly regarded
groups, including Acadian Asset Management and Murray Johnstone Limited. While superior
historical performance created UAM manager reputations, their acquisition by UAM dimmed
prospects for future excess returns. The emphasis on asset gathering, loss of entrepreneurial
drive, and diversion of revenues to passive shareholders created conditions that led to
investment mediocrity.
Even though UAM's 1997 annual report lists the name, address, and investment strategy of
each of the firm's affiliated managers, no performance data appear. Net client withdrawals of
$16.0 billion in 1997, representing 9.4 percent of assets at the beginning of the year, pointed to
the conclusion that managers produced generally unsatisfactory performance. The few textual
references to investment performance do little to confuse the annual report's clear message:
manager rewards stem from increasing assets under management, not from generating superior
investment returns.
Board chairman Norton Reamer addresses the leakage of assets by identifying "improving
our firms' net client cash flow [as] our top priority in 1998....24 The report later outlines
incentive programs to reach the goal, "which is clearly a function of improved client service
and retention as well as product development and marketing." Where is the reference to
investment returns? The annual report indicates that new acquisitions will "concentrate on
firms with the highest growth potential," not on firms most likely to provide superior
performance.
In spite of a roaring bull market, UAM failed to increase "net client cash flow." Throughout
1998, nearly $20 billion
assets left the money management firms under UAM's umbrella.
While UAM continued to articulate a goal of increasing assets through improved client
servicing, the firm announced several investment-oriented initiatives designed to improve
performance.
The performance improvement initiatives evidently failed, as 1999 proved no more
successful than 1998. UAM's annual report noted that assets under management increased a
scant $1.2 billion during the bull-market year, investment gains of $22.5 billion only slightly
surpassed client outflows of $21.1 billion.
On June 16, 2000, UAM threw in the towel, entering into an agreement to sell the firm to
Old Mutual. The Wall Street Journal noted that the purchase price, which amounted to about
1.2 percent of assets under management, stood at the low end of the "going rate of 1%-to-5% of
assets," reflecting some of the restructuring work that lies ahead. "25 Trevor Moss, a London-
based securities analyst, observed that UAM had "about the same level of assets under
management that it had about five years ago," a dismal showing in the context of the U.S.
equity market's nearly threefold increasc.26
UAM fizzled for a variety of reasons. External ownership of investment firms inevitably
alters the institutional culture, diminishing the entrepreneurial spirit so critical to successful
money management organizations. When senior professionals "cash out," the single-minded
focus on generating strong results dissipates, sapping the vitality of the firm. After the sale of a
firm, junior professionals face a less rosy future. According to UAM disclosure documents,
after a typical acquisition, only 50 percent to 70 percent of revenues remain with the
investment management firm. The diversion of resources to passive external shareholders
reduces the size of the pic available for distribution to investment professionals, creating
instability. Employees of professional services firms with substantial outside ownership enjoy
the option of moving across the street, setting up shop and garnering a greater share of the
newly formed independent firm's profits.
In October 2007, Old Mutual's president and chief executive officer Scott Powers
acknowledged the challenge of external ownership, noting that "[i]t's taken us a while to figure
out the right mix of short-term and long-term incentives." Five years after the UAM purchase,
Old Mutual "largely completed the process of changing revenue sharing agreements into
profit sharing arrangements, a step that reduces incentives to gather assets. In 2007, Powers
articulated a longer term goal "to get cquity into the hands of our affiliates." While providing
equity ownership to the principals of investment management subsidiaries moves the
organizational structure in the right direction, the ultimate sharing of equity necessarily falls
short of the 100 percent ownership characteristic of an independent investment manager.27
Pursuit of investment excellence in the context of a conglomerate of investment managers
proves futile, as the goals of external owners fail to coincide with the aspirations of investors.
Asset gathering creates discconomies of scale for investors, decreasing the possibility of
achieving superior performance. The transformation of senior managers from owners to
employees creates changes in firm culture that disadvantage investors. Finally, compensation
for external shareholders impairs the money management firm's ability to pay portfolio
managers at competitive levels, leading to turnover among personnel and posing risks to
investor assets. Significant external ownership of asset management firms creates barriers to
investment success.
Investment Banks and Investment Management
Conflicts of interest abound in the financial world, with large, complex organizations facing
the widest range of issues. Investment banks frequently sponsor private equity funds, using
access to proprietary deal flow as a selling point. Unfortunately, deals originated by the
investment banking network come with built-in conflicts. When a company engages an
investment bank to sell a division, alarm bells should ring when the banker suggests that the
investment bank's private equity fund purchase the division. Is the investment bank serving the
interest of a good corporate client by paying a rich price for the division? Or, is the investment
bank serving the interest of the private equity fund by paying a low price? Under such
circumstances, fairness opinions notwithstanding, no fair price exists.
Less subtle conflicts permeate the process. Investment banks sometimes put themselves in
untenable positions, advising companies at the same time as they provide financing. In August
2007, Lehman Brothers found itself horribly conflicted when its Home Depot Supply
transaction floundered amid the LBO debt crunch. As reported in the International Herald
Tribune, Lehman "advised Home Depot on the sale at the same time it was also providing
financing to the buying group. Suddenly, Lehman was turning around and threatening to
scuttle a deal it had advised one of its most important clients to accept. "28
Ultimately, Goldman Sachs replaced Lehman as an advisor and Lehman retraded the deal,
obtaining more lucrative terms for its financing. Advisory and financing roles always conflict;
the stresses of the LBO funding crisis brought the conflict into high relief.
After deals close, investment banks often continue to provide financial advisory and capital
markets services to portfolio companies. In an unusual public description of the bonanza
created by captive private equity funds, the December 14, 1990 Wall Street Journal detailed
fees generated by Morgan Stanley's investment in Burlington Industries.
Morgan Stanley and Burlington Industries
In 1987, Morgan Stanley's leveraged buyout fund invested $46 million of equity in the $2.2
billion purchase of Burlington Industries. Over the next three years, the investment bank
charged the company more than $120 million in fees for services ranging from underwriting to
advising on divestitures. Because Morgan Stanley controlled the board of Burlington
Industries, decisions regarding financing and divestitures were neither arm's length nor
exposed to market forces. At best, all transactions benefited the company, with Morgan Stanley
compensated at market rates for services rendered. At worst, unnecessary transactions
generated above-market fees, disadvantaging the company and Morgan Stanley fund investors.
When a fund sponsor profits by charging advisory fees at the direct expense of investors,
serious conflicts of interest ensue.
Noting that "nearly every time Burlington needed advice, Morgan Stanley turned on the
meter," Wall Street Journal reporter George Anders suggests that "the story of Burlington
Industries raises troubling questions about Wall Street's foray into merchant banking. "29 Fees
generated by Morgan Stanley "for everything from underwriting Burlington's high yield debt
to overseeing a blizzard of divestitures" dwarf the
aity investment made by the partners of
Morgan Stanley in the Burlington transaction, providing handsome returns to the investment
bank irrespective of the returns delivered to the firm's private equity investors.30
Goldman Sachs and the Water Street Corporate Recovery Fund
Goldman Sachs created an even more extensive web of conflicts when in 1990 it established the
Water Street Corporate Recovery Fund, a $783 million "vulture fund" set up to make
concentrated investments in distressed securities. Hoping to be viewed as a savior of bankrupt
companies, instead Goldman stirred up a hornet's nest of conflicts.
One set of conflicts existed between Goldman's financial restructuring advisory business
and control investing in distressed situations. Investment banks generally rely on "Chinese
walls" to contain sensitive data supplied by clients in the course of advisory assignments,
keeping inside information away from securities analysts and traders. The term Chinese wall
may be employed because such walls are easily removed at an assignment's end. A cynic (or
realist) might argue that paper-thin permeability more aptly describes Chinese walls. Because
Goldman partner Mikael Salovaara both ran the Water Street Fund and continued to advise
clients on restructuring, any shred of separation between the business disappeared, causing
"traders at other firms (to joke) that Mr. Salovaara had a 'Chinese wall' in the middle of his
brain."31
The Water Street Fund investment in distressed bonds of toy-maker Tonka illustrates several
strands of the web of conflicts. After accumulating a position in Tonka's debt securities,
Salovaara competed for an assignment to advise Mattel on a possible acquisition of Tonka, in
the process, perhaps, picking up potentially valuable non-public information regarding the
value and salability of Tonka's bonds. Goldman's advantage infuriated Junk bond investors not
privy to the information, causing several to complain publicly and to suggest they would
reduce activity with Goldman's trading desk. 32
Ultimately, Tonka agreed to be acquired by Hasbro, creating yet another problem for
Goldman. The Water Street Fund owned more than half of Tonka's bonds, having acquired
the position at less than 50 percent of face value.33 Even though Tonka's board of directors
wished to sell the company to Hasbro, Goldman played hardball, holding out for more money
for the firm's bond position. While such tactics raise few eyebrows in the rough and tumble
world of distressed debt, some clients saw Goldman's actions as inconsistent with the firm's
avowal to avoid any participation in hostile merger activity. Ultimately, the investment bank's
tactics worked, increasing payments received for the Tonka bond position by reducing the
value of other participants Tonka and Hasbro shareholdings. Goldman's investment returns
came at great expense, tarnishing the firm's reputation for putting clients first.
A final strand in the conflict web relates to Goldman's junk bond trading activity. To avoid
competition, the firm limited the high yield trading desk's activity in bonds that interested the
Water Street Fund. Goldman's trading clients, already concerned about the firm's possible
informational advantages, faced market makers less able to take positions.
Goldman's advisory conflict troubles went beyond the Tonka casc. According to an article
in the June 4, 1991 Wall Street Journal, "nine of twenty-one companies that the Water Street
Fund selected for restructuring' are or were Goldman clients."34 Perceptions mounted that
Goldman invested the Water Street Fund with an unfair advantage.
Faced with a storm of controversy, Goldman shut down the fund in May 1991, several years
ahead of schedule. Even though the Water Street Fund generated handsome returns during its
abbreviated life, the fund's enduring legacy may be its rich series of lessons on conflicts of
interest.
Goldman Sachs and the Global Equity Opportunities Fund
In mid August 2007, Goldman Sachs faced unprecedented carnage in its hedge fund portfolio.
The firm's flagship $7.5 billion Global Alpha Fund, managed by Mark Carhart and Raymond
Iwanowski, posted a stunning year-to-date decline of 27 percent. 35 The lower profile North
American Equity Opportunities Fund dropped 25 percent in the first seven and a half months
of the year. And, for good measure, the Global Equity Opportunities Fund lost a stunning 30
percent of its value in the second week of August alone.36 In aggregate, the net value of the
three funds managed by Carhart and Iwanowski declined by an impressive $4.7 billion during
the first cight months of the calendar year.
Goldman had no skin in the game. The firm's chief financial officer David Viniar
characterized Goldman's investments as "nothing substantial; very immaterial, if at all."
Goldman simply collected fees for mismanaging the hedge funds; the losses belonged to the
firm's investors. Yet, presented with an extreme market dislocation, Goldman chose to become
a principal.
In response to the dramatic price declines, Goldman Sachs arranged a $3 billion injection
into the Global Equity Opportunities Fund, of which approximately $2 billion came from
Goldman Sachs itself. On a conference call explaining the move, David Viniar asserted the
infusion of capital benefited Goldman Sachs and "the current investors in the fund, giving
them the firepower to take advantage of the opportunities in the market today." In reality,
Goldman used the bulk of the infusion to play defense. The fund managers employed the cash
contribution to bring the fund's leverage down from an irresponsible level of approximately 6
to 1 to a still high (but more defensible) level of around 3.5 to 1.37
Goldman's move raises a number of questions. If, indeed, the move benefited existing
clients by reducing leverage and providing firepower, why did Goldman choose to benefit only
clients of the Global Equity Opportunities Fund? What of the fiduciary responsibility of
Goldman Sachs to clients invested in the Global Alpha Fund and the North American Equity
Opportunities Fund? Goldman Sachs's David Viniar noted that the fund managers were
reducing risk and reducing leverage in both Global Alpha and North American Equity
Opportunities. Why should Global Equity Opportunities receive a so-called benefit from
Goldman in the form of a cash contribution that presumably allowed low-cost deleveraging,
while the unfavored funds faced the market-related costs of selling assets in a hostile trading
environment?
The timing of Goldman's investment raises questions about the firm's favored access to
what senior management characterized as "a good investment opportunity." Instead of
providing the opportunity to existing clients of the Global Equity Opportunities Fund,
Goldman took the lion's share for itself and reached out to a select group of investors for the
rest, ultimately raising $1 billion from the likes of Eli Broad, C.V. Starr (Maurice "Hank"
Greenberg), and Perry Capital, 38 As a fiduciary for the investors in Global Equity
Opportunities Fund, should not Goldman first offer the chance to take advantage of the fund's
opportunities to the existing investors?
Viewed from another perspective, Goldman's investment in Global Equity Opportunities
might actually harm the fund's clients, in contrast to the benefit that Goldman claims.
Goldman and the firm's favored co-investors enjoyed the opportunity to invest $3 billion in the
Global Equity Opportunities Fund at net asset value on the day of their choosing. Goldman
got a sweet deal. Had the $3 billion been invested in the securities that comprise the fund, the
market impact of the sizable trades would no doubt force prices up, increasing Goldman's cost
basis. Instead, by using the contributed assets to reduce leverage, Goldman bought in at a price
that otherwise would have been impossible to achieve. Existing investors suffered dilution of
their position.
Finally, Goldman Sachs provided the cherry-picking investors better deal terms than those
accorded the existing Global Equity Opportunities Fund investors. In an analyst conference
call, Goldman Sachs president and co-chief operating officer Gary Cohen noted that the firm's
cash infusion put Goldman in an "equal position to all the existing investors." In fact, the new
money pays no management fee, pays a reduced carry of 10 percent, and benefits from a hurdle
rate of 10 percent. Because Goldman and the other favored investors received preferential terms
on their investment, their actions certainly disadvantaged the existing fund investors.
In any event, Goldman picked an opportune time to make its commitment to the Global
Equity Opportunities Fund. Bloomberg reported that in the week following the cash infusion,
the fund rose 12 percent. A September 20th AP release noted that Goldman's investment had
appreciated 16 percent in little more than a month. At least in the short run, Goldman made
out well. Global Equity Opportunities Fund clients shared in the rebound, but by dint of
Goldman's investment, in an attenuated fashion. Presented with an attractive investment
opportunity, Goldman became a principal, riding roughshod over the interests of the firm's
hedge fund clients and enriching itself in the process.
While investors cannot avoid conflicts entirely, fewer differences in interest exist when investing
with independent investment management organizations. Avoiding affiliates and subsidiaries
of financial services firms does little to reduce the rich set of investment manager alternatives.
DEAL STRUCTURE
Appropriate deal terms play an important role in producing satisfactory investment results.
After identifying an attractive investment management firm, investors face the issue of
evaluating (or negotiating) compensation arrangements. The degree of efficiency in asset
pricing determines in part the nature of the compensation scheme, with passive management
of efficiently priced securities demanding different treatment from active exploitation of
anomalously priced assets. All aspects of investment management fee structures contain
potential for conflict between the interests of investors and investment managers, forcing
fiduciaries to pay close attention to explicit and implicit incentives embodied in management
contracts.
Co-investment
Co-investment provides a powerful means of aligning fiduciary and fund manager interests. To
the extent that a manager becomes a principal, issues regarding agency behavior diminish.
Unfortunately, along with substantial co-investment, issues arise regarding possible differences
in goals between mortal, taxpaying money managers and immortal, tax-exempt institutional
investors. That said, co-investment reduces the incentive for investment advisors to profit at the
expense of clients.
While any level of co-investment encourages fund managers to act like principals, the larger
the personal commitment of funds the greater the focus on generating superior investment
returns. Managers cease to benefit from attracting new capital at the point where the return
diminution on the manager's personal stake caused by increasing assets under management
exceeds the opportunity costs of fees foregone by limiting asset growth. Because the easily
measured level of fees foregone generally eclipses the fuzzy estimate of size-induced
performance drag, only the wealthiest managers confront a clear trade-off favoring asset growth
limitations. Even though the numbers might favor asset-gathering strategies for most managers,
substantial levels of co-investment send strong signals to investors regarding the principal
orientation of fund managers. The idea that a fund manager believes strongly enough in the
investment product to put a substantial personal stake in the fund suggests that the manager
shares the investor's orientation.
Investment of personal assets side-by-side with client capital creates a powerful alignment of
interests. While profit participations focus manager attention on the investor goal of generating
handsome investment returns, a profit sharing arrangement in which managers share only in
gains creates an option that encourages risk-secking behavior. By making a substantial co-
investment, managers participate directly in gains and losses, leading to more balanced
assessment of investment opportunities. To realize the hoped-for behavioral outcome, the co-
investment commitment must be large relative to the manager's net worth, even though the
amount might be modest in absolute terms. When writing a check representing a material
portion of personal assets, the investment manager steps into the role of a principal.
While co-investment generally improves the investor's position by aligning investment
interests, differences in goals bear careful scrutiny. Taxpaying fund managers in partnership
with tax-exempt institutional investors face different after-tax return scenarios. Mortal decision
makers operate with shorter time horizons than appropriate for an enduring organization's
permanent funds. Individuals with large fund investments frequently desire greater
diversification than required by most institutions, which hold an already well-diversified
collection of assets. Even though differences in tax status, time horizon, and risk tolerance drive
wedges between the interests of individual fund managers and the goals of institutional
investors, the benefits of substantial co-investment far outweigh the likely costs.
Compensation Arrangements for Marketable Securities
The character of sensible compensation arrangements for investment managers varies with the
degree of efficiency in asset pricing. Passive management of government bonds demands fee
arrangements different from those appropriate for active management of private equity. For
most asset classes investors face well-entrenched fee arrangements, ranging from asset-based fees
for relatively efficiently priced marketable securities to a combination of asset-based fees and
incentive payments for less efficiently priced asset types. Because marketplace practices
frequently deviate from ideal compensation structures, price-taking investors generally take the
pragmatic approach of choosing the best option from a set of bad alternatives.
Passive Strategies
Passive asset management differs fundamentally from active asset management. Size, the enemy
of active investors, works in favor of index fund managers. For example, passive funds with
large numbers of investors and sizable pools of assets frequently offer crossing opportunities, in
which some portion of exiting investor demand for funds matches entering investor supply of
funds, allowing nearly costless exit from and entrance to the investment pool. Scale improves
tracking of benchmarks, as large size facilitates full replication of the investment universe,
reducing the need for tracking-error-inducing sampling procedures. Experience shows that
funds with billions of dollars track benchmarks with little or no slippage.
Barclays Global Investors, one of the world's largest index fund managers, offers a wide
variety of products designed to mirror various marketable security benchmarks, segregated into
distinct pools for different types of investors. The largest pool of assets, designed to track the
S&P 500, contained $127 billion on December 31, 2006. Before fees the fund returned 8.46
percent for the trailing ten years relative to 8.42 percent for the S&P 500 index. The much
smaller bond pool, with $1.6 billion on December 31, 2006, showed similarly impressive
results, with ten-year returns of 6.33 percent relative to 6.26 percent for the Lehman Brothers
Government Corporate Index. The commodity-like nature of passive investing commands
commodity-like compensation. Index fund managers compete with the alternative of
internally managed passive portfolios, forcing fees to a paltry two basis points per year for large
accounts,III By choosing passive alternatives for efficiently priced assets, investors expect
predictable results at a bargain price.
While strong arguments support passive management for all marketable securities, two
factors argue strongly for passive management of bond portfolios in particular. First, to satisfy
the deflation hedging role of fixed income, investors must hold long-term, high quality, non-
callable bonds, suggesting the creation of stable duration government bond portfolios. Second,
the extraordinary efficiency in the pricing of government bonds makes active security selection
decisions a costly exercise in futility. The need for a stable maturity structure and the futility of
individual security bets require that investors manage bond portfolios passively.
While domestic equity investors enjoy more flexibility in structuring portfolios than bond
investors, the difficulty of identifying material mispricings in the stock market, particularly
among large-capitalization securities, leads many investors to index common stocks. By
avoiding high fees and substantial transactions costs, index funds provide long-term results that
represent a formidable hurdle for investors hoping to outperform. Yet, in spite of the clear
difficulties in producing risk-adjusted excess returns, most investors pursue active management
strategies.
Active Strategies
Careful active investors pay close attention to fee arrangements, recognizing that fees represent
a substantial obstacle to market-beating performance. Active managers of marketable securities
generally receive asset-based fees in exchange for portfolio management services. On one level,
interests coincide. To the extent that a manager increases assets through superior investment
performance, both the manager and the investor win as the manager's income increases and the
investor's return pleases. On other levels, interests conflict. The manager may pursuc a "staying
in business strategy to protect fee income by closet indexing, holding a market-like portfolio
unlikely to produce results that would lead to termination. Perhaps even more damaging, the
manager may conclude that gathering assets provides greater fee income than generating
superior returns.
In growing assets, managers simply respond to economic incentives. With asset-based fees,
income increases as assets under management increase. Frequently, managers find it easier to
add assets by attracting new accounts than by creating excess returns. With distressingly few
exceptions, fund managers aggressively pursue marketing activities, attempting to gather as
many assets as possible. Retaining assets requires avoiding disastrous performance, causing
money managers to create market-like portfolios that all but eliminate the chance for superior
performance. Investment management represents, at best, a secondary consideration for most
institutional fund managers.
Creating appropriate deal structures allows investors to mitigate many of the conflicts
inherent in the investment advisory relationship. Sensible fee arrangements contain two
elements: base compensation that covers reimbursement of reasonable overhead costs and
incentive compensation that rewards a manager's value added. The incentive compensation, or
profits interest, represents a share of the returns generated in excess of a benchmark
appropriate to the investment activity. For example, large-capitalization domestic marketable
equity managers might be rewarded for returns generated in excess of the S&P 500, while
foreign equity managers might receive a profits interest in returns above the Morgan Stanley
Capital International EAFE Index. Fair deal structures, rare in the investment management
arena, encourage appropriate behavior on the part of money managers.
Unfortunately, the overwhelming majority of marketable security managers employ asset-
based fee schemes, causing market gains or losses and portfolio inflows or outflows to
overwhelm the impact of manager skill. Even though a number of managers offer superficially
attractive incentive compensation arrangements, three factors diminish the appeal of most
schemes. First, the vast bulk of marketable security funds generate profits primarily from asset-
based fees, encouraging managers to emphasize increasing asset totals. In other words, even
when firms offer incentive arrangements, those incentive arrangements fail to influence fund
manager behavior because investment firms continue to rely on fee income expressed as a
percentage of assets under management. Second, investment managers tend to offer terms on
incentive schemes that involve modest levels of risk to the firm's existing income flows. Instead
of taking a "blank slate" approach that sets baseline fees at a level that covers reasonable
overhead, money managers try to structure incentive arrangements that ensure continued
income flows even with mediocre performance, protecting the profit margins implicit in
existing fee structures. Finally, investors choosing between a traditional asset-based fee and an
alternative incentive-oriented structure encounter cognitive dissonance, as the performance
expectations implicit in hiring an active manager cause expected costs of incentive
compensation to exceed anticipated payments from a traditional asset-based fee arrangement.
While the concept of incentive compensation structures for active managers of marketable
securities carries a great deal of theoretical appeal, the limitations of real-world arrangements
reduce the effectiveness of incentive schemes in causing fund managers to behave as principals.
Investment management fees, whether asset-based or incentive-oriented, represent a heavily
scrutinized term in most contract negotiations, with investors seeking the lowest possible fee
burden along with a "most-favored-client" clause ensuring advantageous treatment in the
future. Beneath the open, honest discussion concerning marketable equity fee arrangements lic
hidden soft dollar payments, representing old-fashioned kickbacks designed to increase
investment advisor cash flow at the direct expense of investor clients.
Soft Dollars
The history of soft dollars provides a worrisome tale. Prior to May 1, 1975, Wall Street
operated under a system of fixed commissions that set rates far above the costs of executing
trades. Competitive forces caused brokerage firms to circumvent the fixed prices, by providing
rebates to favored customers in the form of soft dollars. Soft dollars, in essence a kickback from
broker to trader, funded the purchase of both investment-related and noninvestment-related
goods and services.
Think about the implications of soft-dollar trades for investors. Paying inflated
commissions to trade securities, for whatever purpose, reduces investment returns. The
reduction in return comes straight from the investor's pocket. The benefit, in the form of
goods and services, accrues directly to the fund manager. Because the costs of soft-dollar goods
and services would otherwise have come from the fund's management foc, soft dollars
represent nothing other than a well-disguised increase in management fees. Wall Street benefits
at the investor's expense.
AT. Rowe Price disclosure document, dated March 1, 2004, describes the soft-dollar game.
"[U]nder certain conditions, higher brokerage commissions may be paid in return for
brokerage and research services.... [S]uch services may include computers and related
hardware. T. Rowe Price also allocates brokerage for research services which are available for
cash.... [T]he expenses of T. Rowe Price could be materially inc lif it attempted to
generate additional information through its own staff. To the extent that research services of
value are provided by brokers or dealers, T. Rowe Price is relieved of expenses it might
otherwise bear." Investors learn of T. Rowe Price's soft-dollar policies through carefully
constructed, legally correct prose buried on pages 90 and 91 of an infrequently read disclosure
document. Even though T. Rowe Price presumably satisfies legal requirements with its
disclosure, the firm compromises investor interests with its soft-dollar usage.
After May Day 1975, when the SEC abolished the system of fixed commissions, the raison
d'tre for soft dollars vanished. Price competition would set brokerage commission rates.
Under-the-table kick-backs could disappear. Unfortunately for investors, fund managers
realized that soft dollars transferred research-related expenses from their account (management
fee income) to the investors' account (trading expenses). As a result, the money management
industry enthusiastically defended the use of soft dollars.
Instead of banning soft dollars, in 1975 Congress created a safe harbor for their use under
Section 28(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Perverting a piece of legislation originally
designed to protect the investing public, Congress bowed to pressure from Wall Street and
explicitly allowed fund managers to deplete investor assets, legitimizing soft dollars by
instructing the SEC to define appropriate use. Why do market participants tolerate the
inefficiencies involved in paying inflated prices for trading securities and then receiving rebates
in the form of goods and services? The answer lies in the lack of transparency of the process,
which allows money managers to profit in an opaque manner. Were the soft-dollar charges as
transparent as the highly visible management fees, the investment management industry would
have no use for soft dollars.
When the Securities and Exchange Commission examined the soft-dollar issue in the mid
1980s, the commission not only missed an opportunity to eliminate the scourge of soft dollars,
it actually expanded the epidemic. In wonderfully bureaucratic prose, the SEC noted that its
1986 release addressed "[i]ndustry difficulty in applying the restrictive standards" on soft-dollar
usage by "adopting a broader definition of 'brokerage and research services. In other words, if
the restrictions bind, loosen the constraints. The SEC's 1986 soft-dollar regulations favored the
advisor over the advisec.
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt described soft dollar conflicts in a February 15, 1995 Wall
Street Journal article: "Soft-dollar arrangements can create substantial conflicts of interest
between an advisor and its clients. For example, advisors may cause their clients to pay excessive
commission rates, or may overtrade their clients' accounts simply to satisfy soft-dollar
obligations. Soft-dollar arrangements may also result in inferior executions when advisors
direct trades to the wrong broker to satisfy a soft-dollar obligation."39
To ameliorate conflicts surrounding brokerage activity, in February 1995, the SEC
proposed a new rule under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 that would require
investment managers to disclose the services they receive for brokerage commissions. The
report would list the twenty brokers to which the advisor directed the largest amounts of
commissions during the previous year, the top three execution-only brokers, the aggregate
amount of commissions directed by the advisor to each broker, and the average commission
rate paid to each broker. The disclosure would permit a client to assess the costs and benefits of
the soft-dollar services that the advisor receives, and, consequently, whether the client should
attempt to limit the advisor's use of soft-dollar brokers. Unfortunately, no action resulted from
the 1995 SEC rule proposal.
In spite of Chairman Levitt's public concerns about soft dollars, the SEC again failed to
protect mutual-fund investors in 1998. The regulator's Inspection Report dryly notes "the
widespread use of soft dollars," as "almost all advisors obtain products and services other than
pure execution from broker-dealers and use client commissions to pay for those products and
services." The report recognizes that "advisors using soft dollars face a conflict of interest
between their need to obtain research and their clients' interest in paying the lowest
commission rate available and obtaining the best possible execution." The report details
instance after instance of questionable use and outright abuse of soft dollars, including
payment "for office rent and equipm cellular phone services and personal pense
employee salaries, marketing expenses, legal fees, hotels and car rental costs." Wall Street's
definition of research bears little correspondence to Merriam-Webster's.
In spite of the fundamental, irreconcilable conflict of interest in soft-dollar use and in spite
of the long litany of soft-dollar abuse, the 1998 Inspection Report concludes only that the SEC
"should reiterate and provide additional guidance, consider adopting recordkeeping
requirements, require more meaningful disclosure and encourage firms to adopt internal
controls. Instead of protecting investor interests, the SEC defended Wall Street's gravy train.
While the substance of the 1998 Inspection Report argued for abolition, the SEC wimped
out. Faced with a concerted lobbying effort by interested parties-including investment
managers, Wall Street firms, and the normally sensible trade association of research analysts-
and a lack of pressure from individual investors, the self-styled "investor's advocate" opted to
tighten regulation instead of taking the high road of total eradication. A cynic might argue that
the SEC acts on highly visible, easy-to-understand investor protection issues, while allowing
low-profile, difficult-to-comprchend abuses to remain.
One of the most outrageous "legitimate" uses of soft dollars involves payoffs made by
investment advisors to consulting firms. According to the 1998 SEC report, performance
attribution services constitute "a significant portion of the total commission dollars used in
soft dollar transactions. "40 Obviously, any competent investment manager develops internal
capabilities to understand sources of investment returns, creating evaluation mechanisms
specific to the firm's particular approach to markets. Purchasing performance attribution from
consultants serves simply to line the pockets of the consulting firm at the expense of the
investment manager's clients. Presumably, the consulting firm receiving the payoff places the
investment management firm in a favored position when making manager recommendations.
While investment advisors may wish to improve their standing by purchasing useless
information from consulting firms, using client assets for the purpose turns inanity to
ignominy.
Some investment managers need so much assistance in evaluating performance that they
purchase reports from a variety of consultants. The SEC study cites a large institutional advisor
that "directed $882,000 in client commissions to pay for 13 separate performance analyses."
According to a report in Pensions and Investments, J&W Seligman & Co., a moncy
management firm with $24.3 billion under management, engaged seven consulting firms to
provide performance attribution reports, using client assets to fund the purchase through soft
dollars. By paying substantial sums to Callan Associates ($79,000), Evaluation Associates
($100,000), Frank Russell ($26,789), Madison Portfolio Consultants ($17,500), SEI
Corporation ($10,000), Wellesley Group ($52,500), and Yanni-Bilkey Investment Consulting
($25,000), J&W Seligman no doubt expects favorable treatment in the next search conducted
by the compromised consultants. Payoffs dishonor everyone involved.
Beyond the "legitimate" use of soft dollars to "curry favor with the consultant in his
rankings and recommendations of advisors," nearly 30 percent of investment advisors employ
soft dollars for "non-research products and services. The purchases, which fall outside of the
safe harbor, include use of soft dollars for office rent, equipment, marketing expenses, phone
services, and salaries. The SEC observed that "virtually all of the advisors that obtained non
research products and services had failed to provide meaningful disclosure of such practices to
their clients."42 Aside from using an illegitimate source of funds for legitimate business
expenses, many advisors stepped over another line by diverting funds for personal use,
including purchase of travel, entertainment, theatre tickets, limousine services, interior design,
Internet website design and construction, and computer hardware and software. In the most
flagrant abuse of soft dollars, investment advisors defrauded clients by directing "funds
ostensibly for verbal "regional research' and 'strategic planning' to family members of the
advisor's principal," by transferring soft dollars through a daisy chain of companies controlled
by the advisor's president, and by paying "round trip airfare to Hong Kong for the principal's
son. Even though soft dollars did not cause the theft, the opacity of the arrangement
facilitated the crimes.
Some clients benefit from a different aspect of the current system of commission-related
activity, taking advantage of the murky character of directed brokerage. With directed
brokerage, plan sponsors cause trades to be executed by specified brokers, paying higher than
market commission rates. A portion of the above-market rate flows back to the plan sponsor in
the form of cash rebates or investment-related goods and services. Two factors drive directed-
brokerage activity-directed-brokerage investors gain an advantage at the expense of clients not
directing brokerage, and fund sponsors use rebates from directed brokerage to purchase goods
and services unavailable through normal procurement channels.
Investment advisors commonly aggregate trades for a number of separate account clients,
allocating shares to accounts on a pro rata basis. If one client requests that brokerage be
directed to a particular securities firm, in order to receive a cash rebate, that client accrues an
unfair benefit relative to other clients. In fact, the client who "steps out of the aggregated
trade likely benefits implicitly from all of the brokerage conducted by the investment advisor at
the designated firm. Such arrangements exist only as long as they remain hidden from view. If
disclosed, disadvantaged clients would demand fair and equitable treatment.
Some investors, particularly in political or corporate environments, fail to obtain sufficient
direct support for investment management operations. To augment direct appropriations,
investments staff sometimes employ directed-brokerage and soft-dollar programs, generating
resources outside regular appropriations or operational channels.
Appearing before a Department of Labor Working Group on Soft Dollars and Commission
Recapture, the former director of the New Jersey Division of Investment openly testified that
"he utilizes soft dollars to pay for needed administrative expenses," since "he does not receive
sufficient funding from the New Jersey State Legislature." In fact, the former director urged
that "the current interpretation of research' should be expanded to include travel and hotel
expenses."43 Soft dollars provide a convenient mechanism for the New Jersey Division of
Investment to circumvent constraints imposed by the state legislature, allowing the investment
operation to thwart the intent of New Jersey's elected representatives.
In April 2007, SEC Chairman Christopher Cox added his voice to the chorus calling for
soft-dollar reform. In a speech to the Mutual Fund Directors Forum, Cox asserted that:
Soft dollars can serve as an incentive for fund managers to disregard their best execution
obligations, and also to trade portfolio securities inappropriately in order to earn credits
for research and brokerage. Soft dollars also represent a lot of investors' hard cash, even
though it isn't reported that way. The total of soft dollars runs into the billions each year
for all investment funds in the United States.
An agency focused on ensuring full disclosure to investors has to be very concerned
about this, because soft dollars make it more difficult for investors to understand what's
going on with their money. Hard dollars eventually end up being reported as part of the
management fee the fund charges its investors. But soft dollars provide a way for funds
to lower their apparent fees-even though, in the end, investors pay for the expense
anyway.
The very concept of soft dollars may be at odds with rity in describing fees and
costs to investors. The 30-year-old statutory safe harbor, in Section 28(e) of the
Exchange Act, was probably thought to be a useful legislative compromise when it was
packaged with the abolition of fixed commissions. But surely in enacting Section 28(e)
Congress meant to promote competition in research, not to create conflicts of interest
by permitting commission dollars to be spent in ways that benefit investment managers
instead of their investor clients,44
In May 2007, SEC Chairman Cox called for repeal or substantial revision of the safe harbor
that protects soft-dollar arrangements between broker dealers and money managers. Cox noted
the current system produced a "witch's brew of hidden fees, conflicts of interest and
complexity in application that is at odds with investors' best interests. "45
While the SEC attempts to reform soft-dollar practices, the question remains-why do soft
dollars exist? Powerful market participants in the brokerage community benefit from the
inherent murkiness of soft-dollar transactions. Third party providers of soft-dollar-eligible
goods and services maintain a strong vested interest in supporting the current system.
Investment advisors employing soft dollars increase net income by transferring a portion of
investment management costs to clients.
Soft-dollar activity flies in the face of reasonable governance. Investment advisors employ
soft dollars to pay off consulting firms and increase investment management revenues, relying
on the technique's opacity to hide from view. Fund managers incur frictional costs to pursue
initiatives with directed commissions for which "hard" dollars are unavailable, frustrating the
intentions of fund fiduciaries. Soft dollars and directed brokerage, the slimy underbelly of the
brokerage world, ought to be banned.
Compensation Arrangements for Nontraditional Assets
Fee arrangements in the nontraditional asset arena typically include some form of profits
interest. In spite of important limitations, when compared to typical marketable security deal
terms, alternative asset deal structures better align interests of fund managers and fund
providers, as the profits interest focuses manager attention on generating investment gains.
Large co-investment by managers provides the strongest force for creating parallel interests,
causing the manager to share in investment losses as well as in investment gains. Forcing
managers to pay attention to the downside of an investment mitigates concerns about the one-
way nature of profit sharing options.
Without substantial levels of co-investment, deal structures in the alternative arena
encourage investment managers to expose investor assets to risk, as the managers typically
receive compensation in the form of an option-like profits interest. Facing a "heads I win, tails
you lose" arrangement, managers respond by adopting an agent's perspective, focusing on
achieving personal gains that may or may not correspond to generating risk-adjusted
investment returns for the providers of capital.
A particularly troublesome problem results from granting investment managers a profits
interest without specifying an appropriate benchmark or hurdle rate. By paying 20 percent of
gains after return of capital, investors give asset managers a windfall in the form of a profit
participation in market-generated gains over which the manager exercises no control. In
creating structures without a reasonable measure of the opportunity cost of funds, investors
diminish the likelihood of realizing superior risk-adjusted returns.
Alternative asset compensation arrangements consist of fee income, generally calculated on
portfolio value or committed capital, and incentive schemes, generally calculated as a portion
of investment gains. In the rarely achieved ideal world, fees offset ordinary costs of pursuing the
investment business, while profits interests create incentives for adding value to the process. All
too frequently, fees exceed the level required to cover costs, becoming a profit center, and profit
participations cover more than value added, rewarding (or penalizing) managers for results
beyond their control.
Fee Income
Reasonable fee income provides sufficient revenue to cover a firm's overhead, allowing
investors to run the business comfortably. Investment principals deserve fair salaries, nicely
appointed offices, and sufficient resources to structure and manage the portfolio. Ideally,
investors would discuss with fund managers the level of resources required to operate the firm,
setting a budget sufficient to meet the agreed-upon needs. In practice, few firms take a
budgeted approach to setting fees. Most firms maintain industry-standard fee percentages as
fund sizes grow and generate enormous cash flows simply from raising ever larger funds.
Deal fees, paid to private fund managers upon consummation of an acquisition, serve to
line the pockets of fund managers at the direct expense of investors. Typically found in the
leveraged buyout arena, such fees motivate firms to do deals and provide an unnecessary
addition to the more-than-generous compensation package represented by management fees
and carried interests. Fees in excess of those required to run the business drive a wedge between
the interests of investors and fund managers, subtly shifting the manager's focus to
maintaining fees at the expense of generating returns.
Profits Interests
Incentive compensation in the form of a share of gains generated by fund investments provides
a powerful tool to motivate fund managers. A fair and effective arrangement splits the value
added by the fund manager between the manager and the investor. Both parties deserve to
share in incremental gains, since without the manager's work there would be no value added,
while without the investor's capital there would be no deal. Achieving a hurdle rate that reflects
the investor's opportunity cost of capital represents the point at which a fund manager begins
to add value. Unfortunately, in much of the private equity world, hurdles do not exist. By
providing profits interests after return of capital, investors compensate fund managers
inappropriately. Incentive compensation in the form of sharing value added causes managers to
pursue the active investor's goal of creating risk-adjusted excess returns.
A particularly egregious deal structure causes investors to pay incentive compensation to
fund managers before the return of invested capital. Under some private equity arrangements,
the investor's capital account declines by the amount of management fees paid. If "gains" are
calculated off of the reduced base, fund managers may receive a profits interest on a fund that
fails to return investor capital. At the very least, fund managers ought to return investor capital
before reaping the significant rewards of incentive compensation.
Fairness demands that investors earn hard hurdles before profit sharing begins. Hard
hurdles represent rates of return that investors realize before fund managers participate in
gains, with only profits above the hurdle rate subject to sharing. Soft hurdles, a popular
marketing scheme, allow fund managers to "catch up" after exceeding the hurdle rate,
providing little value for investors (except in the case where a manager produces truly miserable
returns).
Identifying an appropriate hurdle rate poses a tricky problem, since alternative markets lack
a ready benchmark such as the S&P 500 for marketable domestic equities. In the case of
absolute return, the cost of funds as expressed by a one-year interest rate provides a reasonable
starting point. Since absolute return managers generally take short duration positions,
measuring investment success relative to short-term interest rates makes sense. In the case of
real assets, where expected returns fall between bonds (representing a lower risk measure of an
institution's opportunity cost of funds) and stocks (representing a higher risk measure of
opportunity cost), intermediate-term fixed income returns plus a small premium might give us
an appropriate hurdle. When forming new funds, investors and fund managers revisit the
question of an appropriate hurdle rate in light of changes in market conditions. For instance, as
interest rates moved downward throughout the 1990s, appropriate real assets hurdle rates
declined from high single digits to mid single digits.
In contrast to reasonable deal structures sometimes available to investors in absolute return
and real assets, investors in venture capital and leveraged buyouts face generally unattractive
partnership terms. By compensating private equity managers with 20 percent, 25 percent, or
30 percent of every dollar generated after return of capital, standard profit sharing
arrangements fail to consider the opportunity cost of capital. At the very least, private
managers ought to return a money market rate before collecting a profits interest. The long-
term return on a marketable equity benchmark provides a hurdle rate more appropriate to the
risk of private equity. In fact, the higher risk inherent in venture capital and leveraged buyout
investments suggests using a multiple of long-term equity returns as a threshold for
benchmarking private equity funds.
Risk-adjusted marketable security hurdle rates for private investments avoid the problem of
compensating (or penalizing) fund managers for market moves that they cannot control. In the
bull market of the 1980s and 1990s, buyout managers "earned" 20 percent of the profits on
gains attributable to stock-market-induced valuation increases. In a reasonable world, investors
might compensate private managers with a profits interest in returns exceeding some premium
over long-run historical results from marketable equity investments, implying a mid-teens
hurdle rate.
Fair incentive compensation schemes for alternative asset managers face nearly
insurmountable obstacles. Under the current conditions of overwhelming demand for high
quality groups, investors lack power to influence terms, facing the choice of accepting the
standard deal or walking away. Investors hoping to encourage fund managers to behave as
principals look to other aspects of deal structure.
Absolute Return Investment Vehicles
Absolute return managers, operating in a marketable securities environment, generally allow
investors to withdraw assets and to make contributions on a reasonably frequent basis.
Although partnership terms generally restrict the timing and size of inflows and outflows,
stable investors face the possibility of incurring costs created by other investors' cash moving in
and out. Cash contributions to an existing partnership dilute the interest of existing investors.
By buying into an existing commingled fund, new investors participate in an established
portfolio without paying transactions costs to establish positions. Cash withdrawals pose the
same free rider problem as departing monies fail to bear the full burden of trading costs
required to raise the cash necessary to compensate departing investors.
A more significant problem arises when cash outflows disrupt a manager's investment
strategy. During the market panic in late 1998, many hedge fund managers worried about the
magnitude of year-end withdrawals. The threat of potentially large withdrawals posed a
dilemma, as on the one hand managers needed to prepare to accommodate departing investor
demands while on the other hand asset sales at depressed prices harm the portfolio. The
confluence of tough market conditions and concern regarding client withdrawals caused many
managers to raise cash by selling assets trading at temporarily depressed prices, impairing results
for the manager and steadfast investors alike.
Fund managers solve the free rider problem by allocating costs appropriately to entering
and exiting investors. In the case of easily measured transactions costs, managers simply assess
entry and exit fees, resulting in a fair allocation of costs. To meet the objective of distributing
costs fairly, fees must be paid to the fund, not to the manager, as the fees offset costs incurred
by the fund. More complicated procedures address the issue of allocating less predictable costs,
particularly charges from transactions conducted in markets with poor liquidity. A rough
approximation of fairness results from segregating new investor contributions, investing the
funds, and contributing the resulting assets to the general portfolio at cost. Even though the
package of securities purchased by the entering investor may not bear precisely the same level of
transactions costs as would trades in existing portfolio securities, if the manager makes new
purchases in markets similar to the existing holdings the new entrant bears a fair burden. Upon
exit, the departing investor receives a pro rata share of the general portfolio in a segregated
account, incurring the transactions costs associated with the liquidation process and insulating
continuing investors from any adverse impact. By causing entering and exiting investors to
absorb costs related to purchases and sales, fund managers avoid unfair treatment of existing
investors. Most importantly, the process allows managers to invest assets without regard to
concerns regarding extraordinary withdrawal requests, since departing investors simply receive
the proceeds of their proportionate share of the fund.
Private Equity Investment Vehicles
Private equity managers best serve investor interests by focusing undivided attention on a
single investment vehicle. With only one place to conduct business, managers avoid the
inevitable conflicts that arise when managing multiple funds with non-coincident goals.
For example, if a buyout firm manages an equity pool and a mezzanine debt pool, tensions
arise in pricing transactions. Better pricing on the mezzanine debt leads to worse results for the
equity holders, and vice versa. Some firms attempt to deal with pricing issues by creating a
formula for determining the terms of mezzanine finance. By pre-specifying the relationship
between the mezzanine coupon level and U.S. Treasury rates, as well as pre-identifying the size
of the equity kicker for the bondholders, fund managers hope to avoid the tricky issues
involved in dividing expected returns between competing sets of investors.
Because dynamic market conditions constantly alter terms of trade for various investment
tools, formulaic approaches inevitably fail to reflect the current market. If the formula
determines worse-than-market terms for mezzanine debt, fund managers fail to discharge
fiduciary duties to mezzanine investors. If the formula results in a better-than-market deal,
equity investors suffer. The convenience of controlling a captive mezzanine fund comes at the
cost of a serious conflict between the interests of lenders and owners. In the event of financial
distress, problems become even more painfully obvious with some members of the firm
wearing mezzanine hats and others wearing equity hats. If equity owners seek forbearance from
lenders, fund managers find themselves in a hopelessly conflicted position. The best course for
bondholders frequently differs from the path preferred by equity owners, posing a dilemma for
even the best intentioned fund manager. In the case of bankruptcy, the problems worsen as
interests clash in the zero-sum game of allocating value to debt and equity. By creating and
managing multiple funds, managers invite exposure to the crossways pull of competing
interests.
While debt and equity funds provide a dramatic example of tensions arising from
management of multiple funds, complementary activities create similar types of issues. Criteria
that determine which fund receives a particular transaction, carefully delineated in the fund
offering documents, frequently fail to address subsequent realities, creating messy allocation
issues for fund managers. Perhaps even more important, the fund manager faces the daily
problem of deciding which particular activity will receive the manager's time and attention.
Because multiple funds contain different sets of investors with different interests, in choosing
which activities to pursue the fund manager decides which set of investors to serve.
Fund manager investment outside of investment pools deserves careful scrutiny. Investment
principals must avoid doing private deals for their own account, even if the transactions seem
too small, too funky, or otherwise inappropriate for the institutional fund. Investors deserve
the complete dedication of fund manager investment efforts. Undiluted focus of all
professional energies on the management of a single investment pool forms an important
starting point in serving investment client needs.
KKR's Deal Structure Flaws
Poorly structured private investment deals often produce dramatically misaligned interests.
The well known buyout firm, Kohlberg, Kravis, & Roberts (KKR), negotiated partnership
terms in its 1993 fund that enriched the principals regardless of the results for the limited
partners. Like managers of most private equity funds, KKR received a carried interest of 20
percent of the partnership's profits. Unlike most funds, KKR did not aggregate investments
when calculating the profits interest. That is, KKR collected 20 percent of the profits on
successful deals, with no offset for losses incurred in failed transactions, creating an incentive to
roll the dice. KKR owned a share of the profits of big wins, but suffered none of the pain of big
losses. In essence, the deal structure encouraged the firm to take enormous risk by creating
option-like payoffs for the general partners through use of extreme financial or operating
leverage.
KKR's sagreement with the limited partners called for a management fee of 1.5 percent of
assets, typical of leveraged buyout partnerships. Such management fees, designed to cover the
cost of running a buyout fund's business, became a profit center for KKR because of the
enormous size of funds under supervision. Not satisfied with excessive management fees, KKR
collected deal fees for consummating transactions, monitoring fees for managing positions and
investment banking fees for subsequent capital market transactions. The overly generous
management fees, deal fees, monitoring fees, and investment banking fees drive a wedge
between the interests of the general partners (more is better) and the limited partners (less is
more). Contrast this with the terms of Warren Buffett's original partnership, in which he
charged no management fee, believing that he should only profit if his co-investors profited!46
KKR's August 1995 purchase of Bruno's illustrates the misaligned interests. The $1.2
billion transaction, which included an equity investment of $250 million, involved the
acquisition of a chain of supermarkets headquartered in Mississippi. KKR charged an
acquisition fee of $15 million, which exceeded the general partners' investment by a significant
margin. Pro-rated management fees, charged on committed capital, amounted to $3.75 million
on an annual basis. The monitoring fee consumed an additional $1 million annually.
Moreover, in 1997 KKR charged Bruno's investment banking fees of $800,000. In exchange
for financing the purchase and paying tens of millions of dollars of fees, in February 1998, the
limited partners lost their entire investment when Bruno's declared bankruptcy, filing for
Chapter XI.
Properly structured deals cause general partners and limited partners to share in both profits
and losses. If a managing agent shares only in profits, incentives to take risk abound.
Management fee income that covers only overhead forces investors to perform before receiving
extraordinary profits. Fees above the basic overhead level represent an undeserved transfer from
limited partners to general partners. The combination of high levels of fee income and option-
like payoff structure allowed KKR to profit unreasonably on the Bruno's deal, while the firm's
investors wrote off the transaction.
Some aspects of the unusually egregious fee structure employed by KKR disappeared in
1996, when the firm raised a then-market-leading $5.7 billion fund. Pressured by substantial
institutional investors, the buyout firm agreed to aggregate the results of all deals in the fund,
offsetting deficits from losers before taking profits on winners. While KKR's investors expect
to benefit from the pooling of transaction results, the firm continues to benefit from
extraordinary levels of fee income, ensuring general partner success regardless of limited partner
investment results.
KKR's fee income in 2006 illustrates the role of fees in the stunning transfer of wealth from
limited partners to general partners. According to the July 3, 2007 preliminary S-1 filed with
the SEC to facilitate KKR's proposed IPO, in 2006 the firm received $67 million in monitoring
fees and $273 million in transaction fees. Harvard Business School Professor Josh Lerner
estimates that fund management fees in 2006 amounted to approximately $350 million.47
KKR's senior professionals, who reportedly numbered twenty-five, collected an estimated $690
million in fees simply for showing up, turning on the lights, and going about their day-to-day
business.
In spite of KKR's 1996 removal of the deal-by-deal incentive compensation clause, investors
generally exercise little influence over deal terms, as investment managers hew to an industry
standard scale that provides higher levels of income at lower risk than would a fair
compensation structure. Consider an environment where managers receive base fees to cover
reasonable overhead and earn a portion of excess returns to provide incentive. Since a majority
of market participants fail to beat a fair risk-adjusted benchmark, most fund managers would
face a substantial decline in income under a fair deal structure.
Because profits interests begin to accrue after return of capital, private managers collect
incentive compensation after investors receive a zero rate of return. If private managers received
a profits interest in gains only above a risk-adjusted benchmark, based on historical results the
overwhelming number of managers would fail to earn incentive compensation. Because the
investment management industry receives compensation far in excess of levels justified by the
degree of value created, investors encounter enormous resistance to institution of reasonable
deal structures.
Unfortunately, when altering the terms of the trade, investors face the challenge of making
industry-wide changes, since manager-by-manager change introduces the potential for
instability. If a single private equity manager promoted a fair deal structure, compensation for
that firm's principals would fall far short of industry standards. Personnel at the firm could
cross the street, work for a private fund operating under the unfair profit sharing regime,
thereby increasing personal income dramatically. The innovative private fund, offering a fair
deal, retains only those principals without other alternatives.
Investors find terms of trade in the private equity arena moving away from fairness. Fees on
multibillion-dollar buyout funds generate tens of millions of dollars per annum, far in excess of
amounts necessary to fund reasonable levels of partnership operating expenses. Buyout fund
profits interests take 20 percent of returns created by the stock market's upward bias, not to
mention 20 percent of returns produced by highly leveraged capital structures. After adjusting
for fees, profits interests, and the risk, no excess return remains for the overwhelming number
of capital providers.
Venture capital investors fare little better. In the past, the venture community fell into a neat
three-tier structure with Kleiner Perkins atop the hierarchy earning a 30 percent profits
interest, a handful of superb firms receiving a 25 percent carry, and the rest of the industry
taking home 20 percent of gains. The late 1990s Internet mania turned many solid venture
capitalists into bull market geniuses, causing them to demand an increase in compensation
from 20 percent of profits to 25 percent or even 30 percent. While a few making the move
deserve inclusion in the elite ranks of the industry, most simply say "it's the market" or "we
need to do it for competitive reasons." Such top-of-the-market increases in compensation
persisted through the subsequent period of weak venture returns, creating a pattern one-way
ratcheting of deal terms against investor interests.
A recent study by two Wharton School academics, Andrew Met-rick and Ayako Yasuda,
produced some startling results regarding the relationship between fee income and profits
interests. The authors examined detailed records of 238 funds raised between 1992 and 2006.
Based on their modeling of the partnership characteristics, "about 60 percent of expected
revenue comes from fixed-revenue components which are not sensitive to performance."48 The
conclusion that the majority of general partner compensation takes the form of fee income calls
in question the basic private equity partnership structure.
Michael Jensen, professor emeritus at the Harvard Business School, expressed concerns
about private equity compensation schemes in a September 2007 interview with the New York
Times's Gretchen Morgenson. Jensen, "the man whom many consider to be the intellectual
father of private equity," "deplores the newfangled fees that private equity firms are levying on
their clients." Jensen said, "I can predict without a shred of doubt that these fees are going to
end up reducing the productivity of the model. And it creates another wedge between the
outsiders and insiders, which is very, very serious. People are doing this out of some short-run
focus on increasing revenues, and not paying attention to what the strengths of the model
are. "49 Investors in private equity fare best with smaller, more entrepreneurial fund managers
that benefit less from fees and more from profit participation.
Negotiating Change
While long established practices limit the ability of investors to negotiate fair deal terms, in the
early 1990s the real estate industry presented an opportunity for radical restructuring. After
recklessly throwing staggering amounts of capital into real estate in the 1980s, institutions
withdrew almost completely from the market after the turn-of-the-decade collapse in prices.
Those few investors interested in committing funds faced a host of unattractive investment
management alternatives.
Large fee-driven advisors dominated institutional real estate activity in the 1980s. Firms
such as AEW, Copley, Heitman, JMB, LaSalle, RREEF, and TCW amassed billions of dollars
in assets, driven by the steady stream of acquisition fees, management fees, and disposition fees.
Not surprisingly, the real estate advisory community adopted a laser-like focus on initiating,
maintaining and enhancing flows of fee income, often neglecting even to consider the notion
of generating investment returns for clients.
JMB's Fee Bonanza
Headquartered in Chicago and named for Robert Judelson, Judd Malkin, and Neil Bluhm,
JMB typified the fee orientation of the 1980s advisory crowd. Not content to collect flows of
income based on the fair value of client assets, the firm went to extraordinary lengths to collect
its fees even as portfolio assets withered in the 1990s real estate collapse.
Exhibiting nearly unbelievable greed, JMB retained underwater positions simply to collect
fees from clients. In July 1986, the firm acquired Argyle Village Square, a retail property in
Jacksonville, Florida, for $22 million as part of a portfolio of properties held in a commingled
fund, Endowment and Foundation Realty-JMB II. Encumbered by a mortgage of $12.4
million, the property generated fees for JMB of 1.25 percent on the gross value of the asset,
equivalent to nearly 2.3 percent on the original equity investment.
By 1992, Argyle Village Square declined in value to the extent that the property's mortgage
exceeded its market price. The anchor tenant, discount department store Zayre's, vacated its
space, dramatically impairing the property's future prospects. Instead of turning the shopping
center over to the lender, JMB held the asset on its books at zero equity value, continuing to
collect fees from investors based on the gross value of the property. With a cash return of 1.1
percent (after debt service and before fees), Argyle Village Square's fee of 1.25 percent exceeded
the property's income. To add injury to insult, JMB used investor cash flow from other assets
to make up the difference, ensuring the continued flow of the full level of fees to the firm. In
spite of repeated requests from investors to dispose of Argyle Village and stop the diversion of
portfolio cash flow to pay fees, JMB retained the shopping center and piggily fed at the trough
of investor assets.
In the largest real estate acquisition ever," JMB's 1987 purchase of Cadillac Fairview, a
collection of Canadian retailing properties, generated a fee bonanza for the firm on a
stupendous scale.50 Continuing its practice of assessing fees on the gross value of transactions,
JMB's initial fee amounted to one percent of the C$6.8 billion deal, representing a load of 3.4
percent on original equity contributions of approximately C$2.0 billion. JMB included in the
gross transaction valuc a portfolio of assets worth approximately C$560 million already under
contract for sale, causing the firm to "carn" C$5.6 million for acquiring and immediately
selling assets with absolutely no potential to benefit investors.
JMB's "feeing" frenzy continued with annual asset management fees of 0.5 percent per year
on gross fair market value (equivalent to 1.7 percent of initial equity), participation fees of 1.75
percent per year on cash flow and capital proceeds, and disposition fees of 1.0 percent on gross
proceeds (with a parenthetical reminder in the Offering Memorandum that gross proceeds
includes indebtedness," in case the investor forgot).
In addition to initial fees, annual fees, participation fees, and disposition fees, JMB retained
the right to provide property management, leasing, insurance brokerage, and other services
with compensation negotiated on an "arms-length" basis. Not satisfied with the staggering
array of fee-generating opportunities, JMB contracted to receive incentive fees of 15 percent of
profits after providing a 9 percent simple annual return to investors.
Unfortunately for JMB and its co-investors in Cadillac Fairview, in the tough environment
of the early 1990s, the overpriced, overleveraged buyout suffered. Notwithstanding an
additional 1992 equity contribution of C$700 million, by 1994 interests representing the
C$2.7 billion of equity contributed by investors traded at 20 cents to 25 cents on the dollar. As
pension investors from California, Massachusetts, Illinois, and Iowa watched the relentless
decline in asset valuc, JMB continued to collect its management fees.
Responding to outrage over the real estate advisor's insulation from the failure of the
Canadian mega-deal, JMB voluntarily reduced its annual fee from $30 million to $25 million,
while noting that the fee compensated the firm for advising Cadillac Fairview, not the
investors! Judd Malkin highlighted the lack of coincidence of interest with his investors,
observing that "[i]f I cut my fees by one-half, it still doesn't change their return."51
Succumbing to the inevitable consequence of too much debt and too little cash flow, in
December 1994, Cadillac Fairview filed for protection from creditors in Canadian bankruptcy
court. In spite of the failure of the company and massive losses by its investors, JMB
aggressively sought to retain the gravy train, suing Cadillac Fairview for C$225 million, of
which C$180 million represented the future stream of fees for advising the company on its
Canadian properties. JMB settled the fee claim for C$22.5 million in 1995.
In spite of the massive failure of Cadillac Fairview and JMB's outrageous treatment of
investors, Neil Bluhm raised another institutional fund, Walton Street Capital, in 1997. The
original fund paved the way for a series of funds, which as of 2007 boasted $3.5 billion of
aggregate equity commitments. Bluhm's asset-gathering ability and fee-charging acumen
created a net worth sufficient to merit a rank of 215 on the 2006 Forbes' list of the 400
wealthiest Americans. $2
While JMB may represent the worst of the fee-driven excesses, in the 1980s all major real
estate advisors focused on collecting fees, not generating investment returns. Institutions
hoping to exploit real estate opportunities in the early 1990s faced a collection of discredited
advisors operating with fundamentally flawed deal structures. Fortunately, an almost total
withdrawal of capital from the real estate market provided substantial negotiating leverage to
investors willing to commit funds to the cash-starved asset class.
The capital drought of the early 1990s placed investors and real estate fund managers on equal
footing, allowing negotiation of fair deal terms. Providers of funds negotiated management
fees sufficient to cover overhead, but insufficient to create a profit center. Investors obtained a
hard hurdle, forcing managers to provide a fair return before earning a profits interest. In cases
where real estate managers enjoyed a substantial net worth, general partner commitments to
funds amounted to tens of millions of dollars, often exceeding the contributions made by
many of the limited partners. When managers exhibited more modest means, recourse loans
from the partnership provided funds for the manager's co-investment.
The dearth of capital in the early 1990s created an unusual opportunity for investors to alter
the compensation arrangements for real estate investing. Moving from the dysfunctional fee-
driven agency structure of the 1980s to a well-aligned investment-return-oriented principal
structure in the 1990s promoted the interests of investors and fund managers alike.
While the return of capital to real estate investing in the late 1990s croded some of the deal
structure gains, many managers chose to continue employing principal-oriented structures
even when presented with rich fee-driven opportunities. Aside from purely economic
considerations, the loyalty engendered by previous successful pursuit of mutually rewarding
investment activities contributed materially to the decision to continue working with the
existing structure. The dislocations in the real estate markets contributed to long lasting
changes in institutional deal terms.
CONCLUSION
Market efficiency creates substantial hurdles for investors pursuing active management
strategies, causing most to fail even to match results of market benchmarks. Although trying to
beat the market proves tough and costly, fiduciaries frequently accept active manager claims at
face value, attribute investment success to skill (not luck), and fail to adjust results for risk. In
the face of active management obstacles, market players respond to the thrills and excitement
generated by playing a game with scores tallied in the millions, and even billions, explaining the
nearly universal pursuit of active strategies by institutional investors.
Thoughtful investors approach active management opportunities with great skepticism,
starting with the presumption that managers exhibit no skill. Historical performance numbers
deserve careful scrutiny, with astute observers mindful of the part good fortune plays in
successful track records. Odds of winning the active management game increase when
committing funds to managers possessing an "edge" likely to produce superior performance in
extremely competitive markets.
Selecting the right people to manage assets poses the single biggest challenge to fiduciaries,
since integrity, intelligence, and energy influence portfolio outcomes in the most fundamental
manner. The actions of external managers contribute not only to investment performance, but
also to the reputation and public perception of the institution itself, forcing fiduciaries to
embrace extremely high standards in manager selection.
Appropriate organizational structure plays a part in successful execution of investment
programs by ensuring sufficient alignment of interest between the institutional fund and the
external advisor. Independent investment advisors with carefully structured economic
incentives stand the greatest chance of producing high risk-adjusted returns, as appropriate
incentives cause managers to place institutional goals ahead of personal agendas. While
thoughtful deal terms and sensible organizational attributes contribute to the likelihood of
success, even the most carefully constructed arrangements fail when implemented by the
wrong people.
Entrepreneurial firms provide the greatest likelihood of dealing successfully with ever
changing market dynamics, ultimately increasing the chances of delivering superior investment
returns. Unfortunately, successful firms contain the seeds of their own destruction, as size
inhibits performance and age saps energy. Vigilant fiduciaries stand ready to cull the old and
tired, while identifying the new and energetic.
Deal structure plays a critical role in shaping the behavior of investment managers and
determining the fairness of investment gain and loss allocations. By encouraging asset managers
to behave as principals, appropriate deal terms cause investors to seek investment gains and de-
emphasize return-reducing streams of fee income.
Typical compensation arrangements cause asset manager income to depend on factors
beyond the investment advisor's control. As bull market gains inflate marketable security
portfolios and increase private fund assets, managers benefit through enhanced management
fees and profits interests. Bear market losses impose costs unrelated to manager actions. In the
case of both marketable and private deal structures, investment advisors' compensation waxes
and wanes with the market's fortunes, resulting in carnings streams not directly tied to the level
of value created.
By operating under asset-based compensation arrangements that fail to consider value-
added measures, investment managers lose focus on return generation, emphasizing instead a
stay-in-business strategy designed to protect streams of fee income. Partly as a consequence of
poor deal structure, standard compensation arrangements allocate investment gains and losses
unfairly, frequently enriching the investment manager while generating substandard risk-
adjusted returns to providers of funds.
Appropriate deal terms serve to encourage fund managers to behave as principals, causing
them to pursue gains while avoiding losses. Structural characteristics that play an important
role in aligning investment manager and investor interests include the nature of the investment
vehicle, level of fees, form of incentive compensation, and size of manager co-investment. By
secking investment arrangements that motivate managers to pursue high levels of risk-adjusted
portfolio gains, investors encourage a focus on generating satisfactory investment results.
Investors hoping to beat the odds by playing the game of active management face daunting
obstacles ranging from the efficiency in pricing of most marketable securities to the burden of
extraordinary fees in most alternative asset investment vehicles. Only by identifying extremely
high quality people operating in an appropriately structured organization do active investors
create an opportunity to add value to the investment process. Painstaking identification,
careful structuring, and patient implementation of investment management relationships
provide essential underpinnings to an active management program.