6
Asset Allocation Management
The fundamental objective of portfolio management is faithful implementation of long-term
asset allocation targets. If investors allow actual portfolio holdings to differ materially from
asset class targets, the resulting portfolio fails to reflect the risk and return preferences
determined by the asset allocation process. By holding assets in proportion to policy targets and
generating asset class returns commensurate with market levels, investors achieve investment
goals without slippage.
Only the most basic portfolios, consisting entirely of marketable securities, allow investors
to implement investment policies precisely, holding asset classes at targeted levels and using
passive investment vehicles to mirror market returns. Disciplined investors maintain targeted
levels by following a systematic program of rebalancing, using proceeds from selling assets
exhibiting relative strength to fund purchases of assets showing relative weakness. The use of
low cost, passive investment vehicles facilitates the seamless implementation of policy asset
allocation targets in marketable security portfolios. Serious pursuit of rebalancing ensures that
portfolios maintain target levels, exposing the fund to the desired risk and return
characteristics.
Unfortunately, for all except the simplest structures, when implementing an investment
program, real world complexities drive a wedge between the clearly defined ideal and the messy
reality. Investment in illiquid vehicles, pursuit of active management strategies, and use of
explicit or implicit leverage cause actual performance to differ from the theoretical returns
associated with the policy portfolio.
Less liquid asset types introduce the likelihood that actual allocations deviate from target
levels. Shortfalls or surpluses in private assets require offsetting positions in more liquid assets,
driving portfolio characteristics away from desired levels. Since by their very nature private
holdings take substantial amounts of time to buy or sell efficiently, actual portfolios usually
exhibit some functional misallocation. Dealing with the over- or underallocation resulting
from illiquid positions creates challenges for thoughtful investors.
Even when actual portfolio allocations match long-term targets, active management
techniques usually cause asset class returns to differ from index returns. If inefficiencies exist in
the pricing of individual securities, market participants might be rewarded for uncovering
attractive investment opportunities with risk-adjusted excess returns. Portfolio managers
willingly accept risks associated with active management, expecting that investment skill will
ultimately provide material rewards. But because the expected excess returns arrive in
unpredictable fashion, if at all, the actively managed asset class might suffer from periods of
material underperformance, opening a gap between a disappointing reality and the hoped-for
positive active management result.
Leverage, both implicit and explicit, poses another challenge to the faithful implementation
of policy asset allocation targets. By magnifying investment outcomes, both good and bad,
leverage fundamentally alters the risk and return characteristics of investment portfolios.
Unless fiduciaries pay close attention to investment activities, leverage exposes funds to
unanticipated outcomes. Implicit leverage, often found in derivatives positions, lurks in many
portfolios, coming to light only when investment disaster strikes. Explicit leverage, such as that
embodied in security lending programs, contains potential to alter portfolio risk characteristics
in unwelcome ways. Understanding and controlling the degree of leverage in particular policies
and strategies allows investors to fashion investment portfolios appropriate to their tolerance
for risk.
Many market participants treat risk with little sophistication. Portfolio managers spend
enormous amounts of time, energy, and resources on asset allocation projects, implement the
recommendations, and then let portfolio allocations drift with the markets. Some investors
pursue active management programs by cobbling together a variety of specialist managers,
without understanding the sector, size, or style bets created by the more-or-less random
portfolio construction process. Other participants hire managers based on strong past
performance, forgetting to evaluate the investment program, unaware of hidden leverage likely
to provide volatile performance. A thoughtful portfolio management process ensures that
funds accept only those risks that comport with the asset allocation targets and that promise
sufficient incremental rewards.
The Greek author Palladas may have had portfolio management in mind when he wrote
that "there be many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip." Asset allocation drift and active
management risk contain the potential to create outcomes measurably different from
expectations based on the policy asset allocation portfolio. Moreover, exposure to implicit and
explicit leverage moves portfolios to risk levels materially different from baseline expectations,
dramatically altering expected investment outcomes. Disciplined implementation of asset
allocation policies avoids altering the risk and return profile of an investment portfolio,
allowing investors to accept only those active management risks expected to add value.
Concern about risk represents an integral part of the portfolio management process,
requiring careful monitoring at the overall portfolio, asset class, and manager levels.
Understanding investment and implementation risks increases the chances that an investment
program will achieve its goals.
REBALANCING
Proper use of mean-variance optimization and forward looking simulations places risk
considerations at the heart of the investment management process. By evaluating the likelihood
that investment policies fail to meet articulated goals, investors confront directly the critical
financial risks facing an institution. The asset allocation targets selected through thoughtful
application of quantitative tools and informed judgment define with reasonable precision a
portfolio of assets likely to satisfy institutional needs.
After establishing asset allocation policies, risk control requires regular rebalancing to policy
targets. Movements in prices of financial assets inevitably cause asset class allocations to deviate
from target levels. For instance, a decline in stock prices and an increase in bond prices leads
stocks to be underweight and bonds to be overweight, causing the portfolio to have lower than
desired expected risk and return characteristics. To restore the portfolio to target allocations,
rebalancing investors purchase stocks and sell bonds.
Rebalancing facilitates reshaping of marketable security portfolios, providing an impetus to
examine manager allocations. Investors improve portfolio returns by giving funds to managers
expected to outperform, and withdrawing money from those with less rosy prospects. In the
absence of fundamental reasons to change manager allocations, positive results might be
expected from following the strategy of withdrawing money from managers posting strong
recent performance and supplying money to those with weak numbers. When in doubt, lean
against the wind.
Psychology of Rebalancing
Contrarian behavior lies at the heart of many successful investment strategies. Unfortunately
for investors, human nature craves the positive reinforcement that comes from running with
the crowd. The conventional attitude comes through loud and clear in the words of Cabaret's
Sally Bowles: "Everybody loves a winner, so nobody loved me. Contrarian investment
behavior requires shunning the loved and embracing the unloved. Most people prefer the
opposite.
In fact, the world of commerce (as opposed to the world of investment) generally rewards
following the trend. Feeding winners and killing losers leads to commercial successes.
Executives who hyper-charge winners produce attractive results. Managers who starve losers
conserve scarce resources. In the Darwinian world of business, success breeds success.
In the world of investments, failure sows the seeds of future success. The attractively priced,
out-of-favor strategy provides much better prospective returns than the highly valued, of-the-
moment alternative. The discount applied to unloved assets enhances expected returns, even as
the premium assigned to favored assets reduces anticipated results.
stors find mainstream positions comfortable, in part because of the feeling of
safety in numbers. The attitudes and activities of the majority create the consensus. By
definition, only a minority of investors find themselves in the uncomfortable position of
operating outside of the mainstream. Once a majority of players adopts a heretofore contrarian
position, the minority view becomes the widely held perspective. Only an unusual few
consistently take positions truly at odds with conventional wisdom.
Initiating and maintaining out-of-the-mainstream positions requires great conviction and
substantial fortitude. Friends and acquaintances describe fundamentally different investment
programs. The media push a dramatically divergent world view. Brokers urge the sale of
yesterday's losers and the purchase of today's hot prospects. Advertisements proclaim a new
paradigm. In the face of a seemingly overwhelming consensus, successful contrarian investors
turn a deaf ear to the blandishments of the multitudes.
Establishing a contrarian position constitutes only half of the battle. Failure awaits the
contrarian investor who loses nerve. Suppose an investor initially avoids the flavor of the
month. Months become quarters and quarters become years. Ultimately, the weak-kneed
contrarian capitulates, buying into the new-era reasoning. Of course, the buy-in comes just as
the mania peaks, causing the realization of pain without the offset of gain. Taking a contrarian
tack in the absence of the ability to persevere leads to poor results.
Rebalancing represents supremely rational behavior. Maintaining portfolio targets in the
face of market moves dictates sale of strong relative performers and purchase of poor relative
performers. Stated differently, disciplined rebalancers sell what's hot and buy what's not.
Under normal circumstances, rebalancing asks for modest degrees of fortitude. When markets
make extreme moves, rebalancing requires substantial amounts of courage.
Rebalancing Frequency
Investors debate the frequency with which portfolios should be rebalanced. Some follow the
calendar, transacting monthly, quarterly, or annually. Others attempt to control transactions
costs, setting broad limits and trading only when allocations exceed specified ranges. A small
number pursue continuous rebalancing, a strategy that provides greater risk control with
potentially lower costs than either the calendar or trading range approaches.
Continuous rebalancing requires daily valuation of portfolio assets. If asset class values
deviate by as much a one or two tenths of a percent from target values, managers trade
securities to achieve targeted levels. Trades tend to be small and accommodating to the market.
Since rebalancing requires sale of assets experiencing relative price strength and purchase of
assets experiencing relative price weakness, the immediacy of continuous rebalancing causes
managers to sell what others are buying and buy what others are selling, thereby providing
liquidity to the market. In contrast, rebalancing strategies not as responsive to the market
require larger and less accommodating transactions, increasing market impact and transactions
costs.
To the extent that markets exhibit excess volatility, continuous rebalancing generates excess
returns. Market activity on October 27 and 28, 1997 provides a dramatic example. On October
27, a 6.9 percent drop in stock prices accompanied a rally in the bond market. The following
day's reversal saw stocks rebound by 5.1 percent with bonds suffering from selling pressure.
Rebalancing a 60 percent equity and a 40 percent bond portfolio on those two October days
added ten basis points to returns, providing a bonus for an activity dedicated fundamentally to
risk control.
Even though rebalancing profits represent a nice bonus for investors, the fundamental
motivation for rebalancing concerns adherence to long-term policy targets. In the context of a
carefully considered policy portfolio, rebalancing maintains the desired risk level. Thoughtful
investors employ rebalancing strategies to meet policy asset allocation targets.
Rebalancing and Illiquidity
Owners of private assets face a particular challenge in rebalancing activity. At any point in time,
illiquid holdings of private equity and real assets are unlikely to match targeted levels. An
amount of assets equivalent to the aggregate illiquid portfolio shortfall (or surplus) must be
invested in (or withdrawn from) liquid securities portfolios. Appropriate candidates for
investing private asset under-allocations include shorter duration, low risk assets, since funds
may be required on short notice to make investments to bring private portfolios closer to target
levels. Cash, bonds, and absolute return investments provide reasonable temporary alternatives
for private asset underallocations.
The strategy of investing underallocations of private assets in apparently similar marketable
securities holds superficial appeal. For instance, while attempting to build a venture capital
portfolio, allocation shortfalls might be invested in a portfolio of small technology stocks.
Unfortunately, the strategy exposes investors to the risk that venture partnerships call funds
when technology stocks trade at depressed levels, causing sales to be made at an inopportune
time. In the final analysis, private assets constitute separate asset classes because they behave in a
fundamentally different fashion from marketable securities, making dependence on high short-
run correlation between private and public markets an internally inconsistent, potentially
dangerous strategy.
When private allocations exceed target levels, as might be the case when marketable
securities prices decline relative to private asset values, investors face a difficult problem.
Reducing allocations to higher risk marketable securities and relying on correlations between
marketable and private assets poses substantial risks. Yet, reducing allocations to lower risk
assets to accommodate excessive levels of private equity further increases an already elevated
portfolio risk level. Choosing the least bad alternative, investors should fund overallocations to
private assets by reducing holdings of risky marketable assets, thereby controlling overall
portfolio risk levels.
Using short duration, lower risk assets to substitute for generally higher return private assets
decreases expected portfolio return and risk levels, while the opposite result occurs when
reducing marketable security positions to accommodate a private equity overweighting
Because differences may be substantial between characteristics of target and actual portfolios,
investors must analyze thoroughly the investment and spending implications of both target
asset allocations and actual portfolio allocations.
The potential for material differences between actual and target asset allocation argues for
gradualism in altering targets for illiquid asset classes. Keeping the reality close to the goal
facilitates analysis of appropriate spending and asset management possibilities. Avoiding large
differences between actual and target allocations reduces the size of the mismatch requiring
temporary placement in an alternative investment vehicle, limiting the impact of a decision
fraught with problems.
Rebalancing helps investors achieve the risk and return profile embodied in the policy
portfolio. Institutions that follow no particular rebalancing policy engage in a peculiar form of
market timing. By allowing portfolio allocations to drift with the whims of the market,
portfolio risk and return characteristics change unpredictably, introducing more noise into an
already highly uncertain process. In fact, over long periods of time, without rebalancing.
portfolio allocations move toward the highest return asset, increasing the overall risk level of
the portfolio. Ultimately, disciplined rebalancing provides risk control, increasing the
likelihood that investors achieve investment goals.
ACTIVE MANAGEMENT
After establishing policy asset allocation targets, investors face individual asset class
management issues. In the marketable securities arena, passive investment vehicles provide near
certainty that investment results mirror market activity. To the extent that investors pursue
active strategies, actual results will likely differ from the market, causing asset class
characteristics to differ from those of the market as a whole. In the alternative asset arena, lack
of passive investment vehicles inevitably causes active results to vary, sometimes dramatically,
from baseline return expectations.
Investing in passively managed vehicles representing individual asset classes effectively
eliminates variance from market results. Index funds cost little to implement, present far fewer
agency issues than do actively managed portfolios, and promise faithful replication of market
portfolios. What explains the fact that few institutional portfolios employ passive management
exclusively? Certainly, the game of active management entices players to enter, offering the
often false hope of excess returns. Perhaps those few smart enough to recognize that passive
strategies provide a superior alternative believe themselves to be smart enough to beat the
market. In any event, deviations from benchmark returns represent an important source of
portfolio risk.
Investors embarking on active management strategies introduce portfolio biases, either
purposeful or inadvertent. Among the powerful ways in which asset classes might differ from
benchmarks are with respect to size, sector, and style. Size refers to market capitalization of
securities holdings, sector concerns the nature of corporate business activities, and style relates
to the general approach taken by an active manager (value vs. growth).
Deliberate portfolio biases create potential for significant value added. For instance, an
investor might believe that value strategies dominate growth strategies, consciously choosing
only managers with a value orientation. Others believe that small-capitalization stocks provide
superior stock picking opportunities, moving portfolios toward an explicit overweighting in
securities of smaller companies. Purposeful, thoughtful strategic bets might generate risk-
adjusted excess returns for the portfolio.
Portfolio biases come with potential costs. Hiring managers specializing in particular market
segments sometimes skews portfolio characteristics dramatically. Consequently, fiduciaries face
the possibility of meaningful underperformance as short-term costs (poor relative performance
from small stocks) overwhelm long-term opportunities (less efficient pricing of small-
capitalization securities). Strategic portfolio biases add value only if implemented in a
disciplined fashion, after thoughtful analysis, with an appropriately long investment horizon.
Some portfolio bets result from sloppy management. If portfolio construction simply
involves collecting enough domestic equity managers to fill the slots in the portfolio's roster,
the resulting asset class characteristics almost certainly contain significant inadvertent biases.
Unintended portfolio bets often come to light only after being directly implicated as a cause for
substandard performance.
Completeness Funds and Normal Portfolios
The investment management tools of normal portfolios and completeness funds allow
managers to evaluate and control portfolio biases. A normal portfolio defines the universe of
securities from which a manager selects holdings. As such, a normal portfolio represents a fair
benchmark for measuring manager performance. If the aggregate of the normal portfolios
within an asset class matches size, style, and sector distributions of that asset class, the resulting
portfolio contains no deliberate bets relative to size, style, or sector. Bets resulting from active
manager decisions still influence portfolio returns, but those bets ought to be welcomed as part
of a deliberate active management strategy.
If the aggregate of normal portfolios within an asset class fails to match important asset class
characteristics, portfolio managers introduce biases. One way to offset inadvertent biases is
through the use of completeness funds. A completeness fund simply represents the portfolio of
securities, complementary to the aggregate of an asset class's normal portfolios, that causes the
sum of the normal portfolios plus the completeness fund hatch relevant asset class
characteristics.
By offsetting gaps left by the aggregate of a fund's normal portfolios, completeness funds
cause portfolio returns to be driven by deliberate choice, not inadvertently assumed residual
risk. A danger in using completeness funds lies in the imprecision inherent in identifying
normal portfolios. Poorly defined normal portfolios lead to poorly structured completeness
funds, which may fail to fill unidentified portfolio gaps or may offset deliberate security
selection bets.
Because deviations from asset class characteristics cause performance to differ from the
market, fund managers must ensure that deliberate choice drives portfolio structure, not
sloppy construction. Normal portfolios and completeness funds assist investors with asset class
management, but precise application of these tools remains a theoretical goal, not a practical
reality.
LEVERAGE
Leverage appears in portfolios explicitly and implicitly. Explicit leverage involves the use of
borrowed funds for pursuit of investment opportunities, magnifying portfolio results, good
and bad. When investment returns exceed borrowing costs, portfolios benefit from leverage.
When investment returns match borrowing costs, no impact results. When investment returns
fail to meet borrowing costs, portfolios suffer from leverage.
Implicit leverage stems from holding positions that embody greater risk than contemplated
by the asset class within which they are categorized. Simply holding riskier-than-market equity
securities leverages the portfolio. Unless risk levels of securities within an asset class match asset
allocation risk assumptions, the portfolio either becomes leveraged from holding riskier assets
or deleveraged from holding less risky assets. For example, the common practice of holding cash
in portfolios of common stocks causes the equity portfolio to exhibit less risk than the market,
effectively deleveraging returns.
Derivatives provide a common source of implicit leverage. Suppose an S&P 500 futures
contract requires a margin deposit of 10 percent of the value of the position. If an investor
holds a futures position in the domestic equity portfolio, complementing every dollar of
futures with nine dollars of cash creates a position equivalent to holding the underlying equity
securities directly. If, however, the investor holds five dollars of futures and five dollars of cash,
the resulting implicit leverage causes the position to be five times as sensitive to market
fluctuations.
Derivatives do not create risk per se, as they can be used to reduce risk, simply replicate cash
positions, or increase risk. To continue with the S&P 500 futures example, selling futures
against a portfolio of equity securities reduces risks associated with equity market exposure.
Alternatively, using appropriate combinations of cash and futures creates a risk-neutral
replication of the underlying securities. Finally, holding futures without risk-neutralizing cash
positions increases market exposure. Responsible fiduciaries understand and control the use of
derivatives in investment activity.
Leverage magnifies portfolio outcomes, containing the potential to benefit or to harm
portfolio assets. In extreme cases, inconsistency between the risk profile of asset class
characteristics and investment activity leads to significant losses. In less extreme cases,
differences in risk profile cause portfolio attributes to vary meaningfully from targeted levels,
leading to deviations from policy goals. Sensible investors employ leverage with great care,
guarding against introducing material excess risk into portfolio characteristics.
Harvard University
Harvard University's endowment employs leverage in a variety of ways. Consider the
university's June 2005 portfolio. By establishing an unusual asset allocation target of negative 5
percent to cash, the university hopes to enhance portfolio results by generating returns in
excess of borrowing costs. Over long periods of time, Harvard's borrowing strategy promises
superior results as portfolio returns should exceed leverage costs represented by the return of
cash, the lowest-expected-return asset class. Of course, if returns fall below the cost of funds,
results of a bad year will be made worse. In the case of Harvard's negative allocation to cash,
careful disciplined analysis of portfolio considerations led to the use of leverage.
Harvard's second form of explicit leverage involves borrowing substantial amounts of funds
to establish positions exploiting mispricings between securities. At June 30, 2005, the
university's $29.4 billion investment pool supported long positions of $49.7 billion offset by
short positions of $20.3 billion. By altering fundamental asset class risk characteristics, the use
of leverage magnifics security selection bets. In contrast to the asset allocation process's direct
consideration of the consequences of the negative allocation to cash, by grossing up positions
on the balance sheet Harvard alters portfolio risk outside of the mean-variance framework.
On top of explicit balance sheet leverage, Harvard employs implicit leverage to magnify
further the impact of investment decisions. A careful reading of the footnotes to Harvard's
financial statements shows off balance sheet market exposure of more than $19 billion in long
positions and more than $28 billion in short positions. As a consequence of substantial explicit
and implicit leverage, Harvard dramatically increases risk levels, enhancing positive and
negative outcomes alike.
Sowood Capital
Harvard suffered the consequences of excessive leverage in the July 2007 collapse of Sowood
Capital. Managed by former Harvard Management Company partner Jeff Larson, Sowoo
began operations in July 2004 with fourteen employees and $700 million of Harvard's funds.
The firm's pitch book promised investors strictly market neutral, event-driven investments,
quantitative-based arbitrage and value-oriented investments.2 According to the Wall Street
Journal, Sowood "gained around 10% annually during its first three years, often through savvy
bets on debt investments," delivering on its promises to investors and growing assets to more
than $3 billion.3
In early 2007, Jeff Larson's portfolio contained a substantial bet on the relative values of
senior corporate debt and Junior corporate securities. He owned the safer senior securities and
sold short the riskier junior securities, establishing what he expected to be a profitable hedge
against adverse market conditions.
Had Sowood simply attempted to exploit the price differential between the senior and
Junior securities, the firm would have avoided the attention of the Wall Street Journal and the
New York Times. But because the price differential alone provided inadequate recompense,
Sowood levered the portfolio by "as much as six times," hoping to transform a small price
discrepancy into big returns. The leverage transferred the fate for the firm from Sowood's
principals to its banks.
In June, the first cracks started to appear, as the fund lost 5 percent for the month. To take
advantage of the now-more-attractive opportunity, according to the Wall Street Journal,
Sowood doubled the portfolio's leverage to twelve times.
In July, as debt markets grew increasingly unsettled, Sowood's trades should have paid off
with safer positions (that Sowood owned) maintaining value and riskier positions (that
Sowood sold short) losing value. Instead, perverse market forces caused the safer positions that
Sowood owned to lose value without an offsetting gain from the positions that Sowood sold
short.
In a July 30 letter to investors, Jeff Larson described the force that finished his fund:
... given the extreme market volatility, our counterparties began to severely mark down
the value of the collateral that had been posted by the funds. In addition, liquidity
became extremely limited for the credit portion of our portfolio making it difficult to
cxit positions. We, therefore, reached the conclusion over the weekend that, in the
interest of preserving our investors' capital, the appropriate course of action was to sell
the funds' portfolio.5
Leverage and a perverse market combined forces to finish Sowood Capital.
Sowood started the month of July with more than $3 billion and after suffering investment
losses of more than 50 percent finished the month with approximately $1.5 billion. In the
hectic final days of Sowood's life, the firm reportedly sought assistance from Harvard
Management Company. Harvard refused. Sowood Capital-seeded by Harvard, staffed by
Harvard, and ultimately spurned by Harvard-taught Harvard a $350 million lesson on the
perils of leverage.
Granite Capital
Granite Capital's David Askin suffered devastating losses while pursuing an apparently
sophisticated strategy of identifying, hedging, and leveraging pricing anomalies in mortgaged-
backed securities derivatives. Based on a record of generating mid-teens returns with low
variability, Askin attracted funds from an impressive list of investors, including the Rockefeller
Foundation and McKinsey & Company. Unfortunately, explicit and implicit leverage caused
the firm's entire $600 million portfolio to be wiped out in a matter of weeks.
Askin invested in collateralized mortgage obligation derivatives with exotic names such as
super inverse interest only strips. As intimidating as the names might be, the securities
essentially constituted pieces of pools containing ordinary home mortgages. By combining
securities expected to respond in opposite ways to interest rate movements, Askin hoped to be
hedged-when rates move, profits on one part of the portfolio would more or less offset losses
on the other. If Askin correctly identified pricing anomalies, profits would exceed losses by a
margin equal to the mispricing.
Because mispricings in fixed income markets tend to be small, investors frequently use
leverage to magnify the portfolio impact of trades. At the time of his denouement, Askin
employed leverage of approximately two-and-one-half times, running positions of $2 billion on
$600 million of equity.
Askin's portfolio failed to weather the trauma created by the Federal Reserve's decision to
increase interest rates in early 1994. What appeared to be well-hedged positions in a benign
interest rate environment turned out to be wildly mismatched positions in a bearish bond
market. As Askin's portfolio accumulated losses, investment banks that had loaned money to
fund the positions seized the bonds, selling positions to cover their exposure. The combination
of poor portfolio structure and leverage led to Askin's downfall.
Askin sustained major losses because his hedges failed to perform. And yet, had he not been
leveraged, he likely would have survived the 1994 interest rate debacle. Losses of 30 percent on
a leveraged $2 billion portfolio wiped out $600 million of equity. Losses of 30 percent on a
$600 million unlevered portfolio would have reduced equity by a painful $180 million, but
investors would live to fight another day. In fact, subsequent to Askin's demise, prices of the
liquidated bonds recovered smartly. But by that time, Askin was no longer a player.!
Long-Term Capital Management
If the Guinness Book of World Records contained a category for hubris, the principals of Long-
Term Capital Management (LTCM) would top the list. Staffed by a combination of Wall Street
wizards and academic superstars (including two Nobel laureates), LTCM concocted a toxic
blend of arrogance and leverage that nearly brought down the world's financial system.
LTCM's business model involved investing in a broadly diversified pool of arbitrage
strategies, which attempted to exploit anomalies in the markets for equities, bonds, swaps,
futures, and a broad range of other derivatives. Using sophisticated financial models to
diversify overall portfolio risk, the firm believed that it had reduced risk to such a low level so as
to justify an extraordinarily high level of leverage.
LTCM's use of leverage defies imagination. In January 1998, well before the firm's July
collapse, LTCM's $4.8 billion of equity supported $120 billion of balance sheet positions,
representing leverage of approximately twenty-five to one. In fact, the irresponsible levels of
explicit leverage on the balance sheet represented only the tip of the iceberg.
LTCM's investment activities focused in large part on mispricings that could be exploited
through the use of derivative contracts. In many cases, the firm could obtain the desired
exposure with either cash instruments or derivatives, but used derivatives because of the
imbedded leverage. As a result, LTCM took on massive off-balance sheet positions. On a
market exposure basis, combining holdings both on balance sheet and off, LTCM had a total of
more than $1.4 trillion of positions supported by less than $5 billion of equity, representing
leverage of more than 290 to one.
When trouble arrived in the form of Russia's financial meltdown, LTCM's staggering
leverage quickly took the firm down. Even though a Wall Street bailout mitigated the damage,
the fund's losses were enormous. Roger Lowenstein, in his classic When Genius Failed,
described the ugly math:
Through April 1998, the value of a dollar invested in Long-Term quadrupled to $4.11.
By the time of the bailout, only five months later, precisely 33 cents of that total
remained. After deducting the partners' fees, the results were even sorrier: each invested
dollar, having grown to $2.85, shrank to a meager 23 cents. In net terms, the greatest
fund ever-surely the one with the highest IQs-had lost 77 percent of its capital while
the ordinary stock market investor had been more than doubling his money.
LTCM produced a portfolio of generally sensible investment positions. The fatal flaw in the
firm's strategy came from a nearly unimaginable degree of leverage; massive leverage magnified
the positive experience on the upside and similarly exaggerated the negative experience on the
downside. In contrast to LTCM, sensible investors employ leverage with great care, guarding
against a degree of risk that could threaten the viability of an investment program.
Security Lending
Some types of leverage, such as negative cash positions and explicit borrowing to increase
positions, exhibit themselves openly. Investment staff's prepare papers that investment
committees discuss, creating awareness of the general nature and magnitude of the borrowing.
Other forms of leverage remain hidden until trouble arises, causing damage to the portfolio too
late for corrective action.
Most large institutional investors conduct security loan programs, which involve lending
equity and debt securities to third parties, providing modest incremental income to the
investor. Security borrowers, generally Wall Street financial concerns, require the loans to create
short positions or cover failed trades. The security lender receives cash collateral to secure the
asset on loan, making that aspect of the transaction quite safe. The lender pays a below market
rate of interest on the cash collateral, expecting to reinvest the cash at a higher rate. The act of
reinvestment places the entire amount of the security lending transaction at risk in an effort to
generate the hoped-for spread between the below-market-rate borrowing and at-market-rate
lending.
Because the security lender retains ownership of securities on loan, along with the attendant
economic consequences, security lending activity produces little disruption to the portfolio.
Investors find it easy to forget about security lending, relegating it to back-office status. Security
lending rarely appears on investment committee agendas, treated like other functions
performed by custodian banks. If considered at all, committees likely view the process as a low
risk method of offsetting a portion of the bank custody fee.
Typical institutional deal structures exacerbate the unimpressive economics of security
lending. Custodian banks generally run security lending programs, splitting income with
investors on a seventy-thirty or sixty-forty basis, with the larger share accruing to security
lenders. Such profit sharing arrangements cause banks to seek risk, since they share in returns
without sharing in losses. The bank gets a good deal, carning a significant share of the profits
generated by putting client assets at risk. Investors get a raw deal, earning little in return for
exposing portfolio assets to meaningful downside.
The Common Fund
The Common Fund, an organization providing investment services to educational
institutions, learned in 1995 that its security lending program managed by First Capital
Strategists had incurred estimated losses of $128 million. Transgressions by a rogue trader,
Kent Ahrens, caused the losses that later calculations showed to be nearly $138 million.
According to Ahrens, in early 1992 he lost $250,000 on an equity index "arbitrage" trade.
Instead of closing out the position, he tried to offset the loss with speculative trading. After
more than three years of deception and fraud, Ahrens's cumulative losses reached a staggering
level.
The Common Fund security lending debacle hurt the firm in meaningful ways, tarnishing
its sterling reputation and causing large numbers of client defections. At June 30, 1995, the
Common Fund had $18.1 billion of marketable equity and fixed income assets under
management. One year later, assets amounted to $15.5 billion, a dramatic $5.2 billion, or 25
percent, less than would have been expected had asset levels simply kept pace with markets.
The First Capital Strategists story tells much more than the tale of a rogue trader. It
illustrates the risks in pursuing investment strategies with poor payoff structures, highlights
problems of monitoring certain types of trading activity, and shows dangers of inventive
schemes inappropriate for the nature of the investment activity.
Security lending activity at its best involves "make a little, make a little, make a little..." as
investors carn small positive spreads on security loans. Unfortunately, to "make a little" an
investor exposes a lot creating the possibility of "make a little, make a little, make a little, lose a
lot." This negatively skewed return pattern exhibits limited upside (make a little) with
substantial downside (lose a lot), representing an unattractive distribution of outcomes for
investors.
Decades ago, security lending exhibited more favorable characteristics. In the 1970s, when
security lenders paid no interest on cash collateral, extremely handsome returns resulted from
the activity. Since cash collateral secured the value of the asset on loan and the collateral could
be reinvested in U.S. Treasury bills, security lending participants faced essentially no risk.
*Make something, make something, make something" described the activity, while "lose a lot"
failed to register.
Structural changes and increased competition forced security lenders to pay interest on cash
collateral, ultimately causing reinvestment risk to enter the equation. When security lenders
could no longer create positive spreads by simply investing collateral in Treasury bills,
generating returns required accepting credit risk, interest rate risk, or even more exotic risks.
The Common Fund, through its relationship with First Capital Strategists, accepted these
risks with enthusiasm. Table 6.1 lists the wide range of authorized collateral reinvestment
strategies that the Common Fund employed beginning in the early 1980s. Alternatives ranged
from extremely conservative to quite aggressive. Equity index arbitrage, properly implemented,
poses little risk to invested assets. On the other end of the spectrum, Mexican broker
repurchase agreements embody substantial risks.
By following standard Wall Street practice of referring to many reinvestment strategies as
"arbitrages," the Common Fund promoted a false sense of security. Webster's Dictionary
defines arbitrage as "the often simultaneous purchase and sale of the same or equivalent
security (as in different markets) in order to profit from price discrepancies." In today's security
markets, occasional mispricings of futures contracts for stocks and bonds relative to cash
markets provide truc (albeit flecting) arbitrage opportunities. Other so-called arbitrages do not
involve "the same or equivalent security," thereby exposing assets to much more substantial
risk.
Table 6.1 The Common Fund Exposed Participant Assets to Material Risk
Approved Investment Strategies, 1994
Equity index arbitrage
Fixed income arbitrage
OTC option arbitrage
Treasury/Eurodollar (TED) spread arbitrage
Dividend reinvestment arbitrage
Corporate restructuring arbitrage (risk arbitrage)
Forward and reversible equity arbitrage
Convertible security arbitrage
Warrant arbitrage
Equity and corporate bond repurchase agreements
Repurchase agreements with Mexican brokers collateralized with Mexican government securities
Matched positions
Triparty repurchase agreements
Interest rate and cross currency swaps
Fixed income securities called for redemption
For example, convertible arbitrage involves owning a convertible bond and selling short the
stock of the issuing company to exploit perceived mispricings between relatively cheap bonds
and relatively expensive stock. Implementing convertible arbitrage requires dynamic hedging,
which may or may not be feasible, and assumption of unhedged residual interest rate and credit
risks. Under certain circumstances, convertible arbitrage offers attractive risk reward
relationships. Under no circumstance does convertible arbitrage create riskless returns.
At best, referring to risky strategies as arbitrages is a Wall Street conceit, an attempt to create
an aura of mystery and sophistication surrounding the investment process. At worst, the
practice constitutes deceptive advertising, an effort to lessen investor concerns surrounding
fundamentally risky activities.
A further problem with security lending activity concerns the high level of trading required.
Monitoring high levels of activity poses considerable challenges to the trading organization,
outside investors, and other responsible professionals, such as lawyers and accountants. When
investment positions turn over several times daily, supervisors can only trust that traders
faithfully implement strategies and follow guidelines. Investors can only trust that supervisors
monitor the process carefully. High levels of trading activity create difficult control issues.
In contrast, long-term investment activity raises fewer monitoring issues. Security positions
held for months or years generate far less control risk than positions held for minutes or hours.
Moreover, the temptation to hide losing trade tickets in a drawer or to violate guidelines to
trade out of losses seems more consistent with the speculative mindset of a trader than with the
temperate attitude of an investor. In fact, many of the 1990s' most sensational losses resulted
from the activity of rogue traders such as Nicholas Leeson, who brought down Barings PLC;
Toshihide Igushi, who caused Daiwa Bank to be exiled from the United States; and Robert
Citron, who forced Orange County into bankruptcy. While avoiding trading strategies
provides no guarantee against fraud, pursuing longer term investment programs lessens control
risks for fiduciaries.
Poor deal structure contributed to the dangers of the Common Fund's security lending
program. First Capital Strategists earned between 25 percent and 33 percent of profits
generated by putting the Common Fund member institutions' funds at risk. In essence, First
Capital flipped coins in a "heads I win, tails you lose" game. Since the firm did not share in
losses, employees had strong incentive to recommend and pursue risky strategies.
Poor incentives provide only a partial explanation of the problem. The Common Fund
knowingly participated in First Capital Strategists' risk-secking activity. Prior to the Kent
Ahrens debacle, two events brought the risky nature of the reinvestment vehicles to the fore. In
August 1987, First Capital incurred a loss of $2.5 million by speculating on an aborted hostile
takeover of Caesar's World. While First Capital reimbursed the Common Fund for the loss, the
transaction highlighted risks involved in corporate restructuring "arbitrage." Later, beginning
in September 1989, First Capital accumulated a position in the ill-fated employee-led attempt
to take over United Airlines. Ultimately liquidated at a loss of $2.6 million to the Common
Fund, the trade caused security lending for fiscal year 1990 to show a loss of $577,600. The
Caesar's World and United Airlines incidents forced trustees of the Common Fund to be
acutely aware of the risks associated with the firm's security lending program.
In essence, the Common Fund leveraged its assets by participating in security lending,
borrowing funds (the cash collateral), and securing the loans with Common Fund member
institution stocks and bonds. First Capital invested proceeds from the loans in risky vehicles,
hoping to generate positive returns. While dangers inherent in trading activities and problems
associated with poor deal structure provide the most visible contribution to the Common
Fund's disaster, the root of the problem originates with the inappropriate use of the leverage
implicit in the security lending program.
CONCLUSION
Placing asset allocation targets at the center of the portfolio management process increases the
likelihood of investment success. Disciplined rebalancing techniques produce portfolios that
reflect articulated risk and return characteristics. Less rigorous approaches to portfolio
management almost guarantee that actual asset allocation differs from desired levels, leading to
outcomes less likely to satisfy institutional goals.
Attractive investment opportunities frequently contain elements of illiquidity, introducing
some rigidities into a portfolio's asset allocation. By inducing investors to hold positions
inconsistent with targeted levels, illiquid assets cause overall portfolio characteristics to deviate
from desired levels, creating challenges for disciplined rebalancing activity.
Pursuit of active management introduces friction between investment results and
benchmark returns. Sensible investors take great care in identifying portfolio biases, ensuring
that differences result from deliberate choices, not inadvertent consequences of portfolio
construction. Normal portfolios and completeness funds assist managers in understanding and
controlling active management bets.
While successful active management programs eventually create value, investors face the
interim possibility of experiencing periods of underperformance. Many sensible investment
strategies require time horizons of three to five years, introducing the likelihood that even
ultimately correct decisions appear foolish in the short run. When market prices move against
already established positions, investors with strong hands add to holdings, increasing the
benefit from active management. Conversely, sensible investors trim winning positions,
preventing excessive exposure to recently successful strategies. Leaning against the wind proves
to be an effective risk control measure.
Leverage contains the potential to add substantial value and create great harm, posing
particular danger to investors pursuing long-term strategies. Keynes warns that "... an investor
who proposes to ignore market fluctuations... must not operate on so large a scale, if at all,
with borrowed money." Fiduciaries strive to identify and assess sources of explicit and implicit
portfolio leverage, seeking to ensure that the leverage influences the portfolio in an acceptable
manner.
Many high profile investment disasters of recent years stem from leverage lurking beneath
the superficial portfolio characteristics. The Common Fund made explicit use of leverage in its
risk-seeking security lending program, exposing educational institution assets to high levels of
risk in exchange for modest expected returns. David Askin employed explicit leverage on top of
the implicit leverage inherent in his mortgage-backed securities derivatives positions, turning
an otherwise serious impairment of value into a total wipcout. Avoiding headline grabbing
disaster requires thorough understanding of the sources and magnitude of exposure to
leverage.
Serving institutional goals requires disciplined implementation of asset allocation policies,
centered on regular rebalancing to ensure that portfolio characteristics match targeted levels.
Many activities pursued by institutional fund managers create frictions that cause portfolio
results to differ from expectations. Illiquid investments often provide attractive active
management opportunities, while posing significant challenges to the rebalancing process.
Investors employing active management strategies expose funds to the impact of performance
differentials relative to benchmark results. Use of leverage magnifies investment results,
potentially altering portfolio characteristics in a manner unanticipated by asset allocation
analyses. Sensible investors rebalance regularly, carefully consider active management, and limit
leverage.
1. Even though with an unlevered portfolio Askin may not have gone out of business, without leverage Askin never
would have been in business. Leverage boosted the underlying returns on his strategy to the mid teens level necessary
to attract investment capital.