Investment Philosophy
Successful investors articulate coherent investment philosophies, consistently applied to
all aspects of the portfolio management process. Philosophical principles represent time-
tested insights into investment matters that rise to the level of enduring professional
convictions. The central tenets of an investor's approach to markets emanate from
fundamental beliefs regarding the most effective means to generate investment returns to
satisfy institutional goals.
Investment returns stem from decisions regarding three tools of portfolio
management: asset allocation, market timing, and security selection. Investor behavior
determines the relative importance of each aspect of portfolio management, with careful
investors consciously constructing portfolios to reflect the expected contribution of each
portfolio management tool.
Asset allocation, the starting point for portfolio construction, involves defining the
asset classes that constitute the portfolio and determining the proportion of the fund that
resides in each class. Typical institutional asset classes include domestic equities, foreign
equities, fixed income, absolute return, real assets, and private equities. The policy
portfolio describes the target allocation to each of the asset classes employed by the fund.
Market timing consists of short-run deviation from the long-term policy targets. For
example, assume that a fund's long-term targets are 50 percent stocks and 50 percent
bonds. A fund manager who identifies stocks as temporarily cheap and bonds as
temporarily expensive might tactically weight the portfolio 60 percent to stocks and 40
percent to bonds. The return resulting from the overweighting of stocks and
underweighting of bonds constitutes the return attributable to market timing.
Security selection derives from active management of individual asset classes. If a
manager creates portfolios that faithfully replicate the markets (i.c., passive portfolios),
that manager makes no active bets. To the extent that a portfolio differs from the
composition of the overall market, active management accounts for a portion of
investment results. For example, the security selection return for the U.S. equity asset class
would be the difference between returns from the U.S. equity portfolio's securities and
returns from the overall domestic equity market, as defined by a benchmark index of U.S.
equities, such as the Wilshire 5000.
The Role of Asset Allocation
Many investors believe that a law of finance dictates that policy allocation decisions
dominate portfolio returns, relegating market timing and security selection actions to
secondary status. In a 2000 study, Roger Ibbotson and Paul Kaplan survey a number of
articles on the contribution of asset allocation to investment returns. The authors note
that "[o]n average, policy accounted for a little more than all of total return," implying
that security selection and market timing make no material contribution to returns.ยน In
another nod to the centrality of the asset-allocation decision, Ibbotson and Kaplan
conclude that "... approximately 90 percent of the variability of a fund's return across
time is explained by the variability of policy returns."
"2
Investors often treat asset allocation's central role in determining portfolio returns as a
truism. It is not. The Ibbotson and Kaplan study describes investor behavior, not finance
theory. Imagine a buy-and-hold portfolio consisting of one (particularly idiosyncratic)
stock-portfolio returns follow largely from security selection. Or, consider the strategy
of aggressively day trading bond futures-market timing dominates returns.
Obviously, institutional portfolio managers usually buy more than one stock and
rarely pursue aggressive day trading strategies. Instead, investors hold broadly diversified
portfolios and avoid market timing, leaving asset allocation to determine investment
results. Given the difficulties in timing markets and the challenges of security selection,
such behavior provides a rational foundation for investment management. By avoiding
extreme allocation shifts and holding diversified portfolios, investors cause asset allocation
to account for the largest share of portfolio returns.
Recognizing that decisions regarding the relative importance of asset allocation,
market timing, and security selection lie within an investor's purview serves as an
important starting point for policymakers. Instead of passively accepting the
overwhelming importance of asset allocation, knowledgeable investors consider each
source of return as a significant independent factor. Ultimately, in articulating a
philosophy regarding the respective roles of asset allocation, market timing, and security
selection, investors determine the fundamental character of the investment management
process.
By choosing to place asset allocation at the center of the investment process, investors
ground the decision-making framework on the stable foundation of long-term policy
actions. Focus on asset allocation relegates market timing and security selection decisions
to the background, reducing the degree to which investment results depend on mercurial,
unreliable factors.
Selecting the asset classes for a portfolio constitutes a critically important set of
decisions, contributing in large measure to a portfolio's success or failure. Identifying
appropriate asset classes requires focus on functional characteristics, considering potential
to deliver returns and to mitigate portfolio risk. Commitment to an equity bias enhances
returns, while pursuit of diversification reduces risks. Thoughtful, deliberate focus on
asset allocation dominates the agenda of long-term investors.
The principles of equity ownership and diversification underlie asset allocation
deliberations of serious long-term investors. Both historical experience and finance theory
point to the conclusion that owning equities provides higher returns than owning bonds.
Investors seeking to generate high rates of return naturally gravitate toward substantial
allocations to equity assets. At the same time, risks associated with concentrating
portfolios in a single asset type give investors pause, causing prudent market participants
to diversify portfolio exposures. Expressing an equity bias and maintaining appropriate
diversification provide the foundation for building strong investment portfolios.
The Role of Market Timing
Market timing, according to Charles Ellis, represents a losing strategy. "There is no
evidence of any large institutions having anything like consistent ability to get in when the
market is low and get out when the market is high. Attempts to switch between stocks
and bonds, or between stocks and cash, in anticipation of market moves have been
unsuccessful much more often than they have been successful."3
Market timing causes portfolio characteristics to deviate from those embodied in the
policy portfolio, producing inevitable differences in risk and return attributes. If market
timers bet against the stock market by reducing equity holdings and increasing cash
positions, long-run expected portfolio returns decline as the market timer's position
decreases risk levels. Because such activity lowers anticipated returns, market timers must
succeed substantially more than 50 percent of the time to post a winning record. The
wind in the speculator's face, combined with transactions costs and market impact,
provide a high hurdle for those who would beat the market by holding abnormally high
cash positions.
If market timers increase the risk profile of a portfolio by overweighting a risky asset at
the expense of lower-risk positions, fiduciaries must consider the advisability of moving
risk beyond policy portfolio levels. If riskier portfolios produce characteristics consistent
with institutional goals, portfolio managers ought to consider adopting a higher risk
policy portfolio. If the market timer's enhanced risk gives fiduciaries pause, then prudence
demands rejecting even temporary moves to increase risk. Serious investors avoid timing
markets.
The Role of Security Selection
In efficient markets, active portfolio management, like market timing, tends to detract
from aggregate investment performance. In the context of relative performance, security
selection constitutes a zero-sum game. Since IBM (and every other tradeable stock)
represents a finite, measurable proportion of the market value of the U.S. equity market,
an investor can only hold an overweight position in IBM when other investors hold a
corresponding underweight position in IBM. The active manager who overweights IBM
creates market impact and incurs transaction costs in establishing the position; on the
other side of the trade are other active managers who underweight IBM, incurring those
same transactions costs and creating that same market impact. Only one of those
positions can be right in light of IBM's subsequent performance. Measured by the change
in IBM's price relative to the market, the amount by which the winners win equals the
amount by which the losers lose. Since active managers pay a high price to play the game,
in the aggregate active investors will lose by the amount of manager fees, transactions
costs, and market impact.
In less efficient markets, active management produces potentially sizable rewards. In
overwhelming importance of asset allocation, knowledgeable investors consider each
source of return as a significant independent factor. Ultimately, in articulating a
philosophy regarding the respective roles of asset allocation, market timing, and security
selection, investors determine the fundamental character of the investment management
process.
By choosing to place asset allocation at the center of the investment process, investors
ground the decision-making framework on the stable foundation of long-term policy
actions. Focus on asset allocation relegates market timing and security selection decisions
to the background, reducing the degree to which investment results depend on mercurial,
unreliable factors.
Selecting the asset classes for a portfolio constitutes a critically important set of
decisions, contributing in large measure to a portfolio's success or failure. Identifying
appropriate asset classes requires focus on functional characteristics, considering potential
to deliver returns and to mitigate portfolio risk. Commitment to an equity bias enhances
returns, while pursuit of diversification reduces risks. Thoughtful, deliberate focus on
asset allocation dominates the agenda of long-term investors.
The principles of equity ownership and diversification underlie asset allocation
deliberations of serious long-term investors. Both historical experience and finance theory
point to the conclusion that owning equities provides higher returns than owning bonds.
Investors seeking to generate high rates of return naturally gravitate toward substantial
allocations to equity assets. At the same time, risks associated with concentrating
portfolios in a single asset type give investors pause, causing prudent market participants
to diversify portfolio exposures. Expressing an equity bias and maintaining appropriate
diversification provide the foundation for building strong investment portfolios.
The Role of Market Timing
Market timing, according to Charles Ellis, represents a losing strategy. "There is no
evidence of any large institutions having anything like consistent ability to get in when the
market is low and get out when the market is high. Attempts to switch between stocks
and bonds, or between stocks and cash, in anticipation of market moves have been
unsuccessful much more often than they have been successful."3
Market timing causes portfolio characteristics to deviate from those embodied in the
policy portfolio, producing inevitable differences in risk and return attributes. If market
timers bet against the stock market by reducing equity holdings and increasing cash
positions, long-run expected portfolio returns decline as the market timer's position
decreases risk levels. Because such activity lowers anticipated returns, market timers must
succeed substantially more than 50 percent of the time to post a winning record. The
wind in the speculator's face, combined with transactions costs and market impact,
provide a high hurdle for those who would beat the market by holding abnormally high
cash positions.
If market timers increase the risk profile of a portfolio by overweighting a risky asset at
the expense of lower-risk positions, fiduciaries must consider the advisability of moving
risk beyond policy portfolio levels. If riskier portfolios produce characteristics consistent
with institutional goals, portfolio managers ought to consider adopting a higher risk
policy portfolio. If the market timer's enhanced risk gives fiduciaries pause, then prudence
demands rejecting even temporary moves to increase risk. Serious investors avoid timing
markets.
The Role of Security Selection
In efficient markets, active portfolio management, like market timing, tends to detract
from aggregate investment performance. In the context of relative performance, security
selection constitutes a zero-sum game. Since IBM (and every other tradeable stock)
represents a finite, measurable proportion of the market value of the U.S. equity market,
an investor can only hold an overweight position in IBM when other investors hold a
corresponding underweight position in IBM. The active manager who overweights IBM
creates market impact and incurs transaction costs in establishing the position; on the
other side of the trade are other active managers who underweight IBM, incurring those
same transactions costs and creating that same market impact. Only one of those
positions can be right in light of IBM's subsequent performance. Measured by the change
in IBM's price relative to the market, the amount by which the winners win equals the
amount by which the losers lose. Since active managers pay a high price to play the game,
in the aggregate active investors will lose by the amount of manager fees, transactions
costs, and market impact.
In less efficient markets, active management produces potentially sizable rewards. In
fact, passive replication of benchmark returns proves impossible in private markets, such
as venture capital, leveraged buyouts, real estate, timber, and oil and gas. Even were the
market return obtainable, investors would almost certainly prefer to pursue more selective
approaches. When examined over reasonably long periods of time, in aggregate, illiquid
asset classes generally produce mediocre returns relative to less risky marketable security
alternatives.
An inverse relationship exists between efficiency in asset pricing and appropriate
degree of active management. Passive management strategies suit highly efficient markets,
such as U.S. Treasury bonds, where market returns drive results and active management
adds little or nothing. Active management strategies fit inefficient markets, such as private
equity, where market returns contribute very little to ultimate results and investment
selection provides the fundamental source of return.
Market participants willing to accept illiquidity achieve a significant edge in seeking
high risk-adjusted returns. Because market players routinely overpay for liquidity, serious
investors benefit by avoiding overpriced liquid securities and by embracing less liquid
alternatives.
Pursuit of value-oriented strategies enhances opportunities to achieve security
selection success. Value can either be purchased, by identifying assets trading at below fair
value, or created, by bringing unusual skills to improve corporate operations. Value
investors s operate with a margin of safety unavailable to less conservative investors.
The degree of active management opportunity in various asset classes provides
important input into the portfolio management process. Emphasizing inefficiently priced
asset classes with interesting active management opportunities increases the odds of
investment success. Intelligent acceptance of illiquidity and a value orientation constitute
a sensible, conservative approach to portfolio management.
In structuring portfolios, investors make choices, either explicitly or implicitly,
regarding the respective roles of asset allocation, market timing, and security selection. A
strong portfolio management framework rests on asset allocation decisions and
incorporates a bias toward equity assets with an appropriate level of diversification. Since
market timing actions generally prove unrewarding and always cause portfolios to deviate
from desired characteristics, serious investors avoid market timing. Security selection
decisions, while extremely difficult to execute with consistent success, contain the
potential to add value to portfolio returns. Investors enhance opportunity for beating the
market by pursuing excess returns where the degree of opportunity appears largest, by
accepting reasonable degrees of illiquidity, and by maintaining a value orientation.
ASSET ALLOCATION
Equity Bias
Sensible investors approach markets with a strong equity bias, since accepting the risk of
owning equities rewards long-term investors with higher returns. High returns contribute
mightily to meeting the goals of preservation of purchasing power and of provision of
sustainable operating budget support. In fact, the tension between the conflicting goals of
preserving assets and spending for operations can be relaxed only by increasing
investment returns.
Finance theory posits that acceptance of greater risk leads to the reward of higher
expected returns. In a happy coincidence, historical capital markets data, collected by
Roger Ibbotson and Rex Sinquefield, support the theoretical conclusion. Consider the
wealth multiples for investments in various U.S. asset classes and inflation outlined in
Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 Equities Generate Superior Returns in the Long Run
Wealth Multiples for U.S. Asset Classes and Inflation December 1925-December 2005
Asset Class
Inflation
Treasury bills
Treasury bonds
Corporate bonds
Large-capitalization stocks
Small-capitalization stocks
Source: Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation, 2006 Year Book.
Multiple
11 times
18 times
71 times
100 times
2,658 times
13,706 times
Historical Evidence
The data indicate that a dollar invested in Treasury bills at the end of 1925, with all
income reinvested, would have grown eighteen times by December 31, 2005. At first
glance, having multiplied the original investment by a factor of 18 appears satisfactory.
However, given that more than 60 percent of the increase would have been lost to
inflation, the result loses some luster. The low return of Treasury bills should not come as
a surprise. On at least two measures Treasury bills have been close to risk free. Investors
face virtually no credit exposure, as the U.S. government represents, perhaps, the most
creditworthy entity in the world. In addition, Treasury bills have provided a hedge against
inflation, with returns that closely track price increases. The price of these attractive
characteristics has been an extremely low real return. Thus, at least with twenty-twenty
hindsight, Treasury bills would not have been an appropriate investment for an
institution investing to earn substantial after-inflation returns.
Moving farther out the risk spectrum, the same dollar invested in longer-term
government bonds at the end of 1925 would have multiplied 71 times by the end of 2005.
Government bonds share with Treasury bills extremely high credit quality. Unlike
shorter-term instruments, however, bonds have a highly uncertain real return. Twenty-
year bonds, which are used in the Ibbotson-Sinquefield analysis, face two decades of
inflation rates, unknown and unknowable at the time of purchase. Not only do real
returns vary greatly, nominal returns also fluctuate over holding periods of less than the
term-to-maturity. The higher risks of longer-term bonds have been rewarded with higher
returns, although such returns fail to provide meaningful support for an institution that
consumes only after-inflation returns.
Corporate bonds provide an alternative to investment in government securities. Over
the eighty-year period, corporate bonds provided a wealth multiple of 100, exceeding the
multiple of 71 for default-free government bonds. The incremental return reflects
compensation for credit risk and call risk embodied in corporate obligations. In essence,
high-grade corporate bonds are a hybrid instrument, combining bond-like characteristics
with some equity risk and some optionality.
The 18 multiple for investing in Treasury bills, the 71 multiple for investing in
Treasury bonds and the 100 multiple for investing in corporate bonds represent long-
term rewards for lending money. Loans are relatively low risk assets. In the case of
Treasury obligations, the full faith and credit of the United States Government stand
behind the commitment to pay interest and return principal in a timely manner. In the
case of corporate bonds, the instruments have a senior claim on the assets of a
corporation. That is, payments on bonds take precedence over distributions to the owners
of a company, its equity holders.
Obviously, as residual claimants, equity holders face substantially greater risks than do
bondholders. In extreme cases, when corporations fail to meet fixed obligations, equity
owners may be wiped out. In spite of (or, perhaps, because of) these risks, in the United
States, over long periods of time equities have outperformed bonds by impressive
margins.
A dollar invested in common stock at the end of 1925 would have multiplied 2,658-
fold during the eighty-year holding period. An enormous difference exists between the
return expected from the conservative investment in cash (18 times) or government bonds
(71 times) and that expected from taking the greater risk in owning equity securities
(2,658 times).
The long-term benefits of owning equities increase as investments move farther out
the risk continuum. When investors assume the risk of investing in smaller capitalization
equities, the dollar grows 13,706 times during the period, a staggering amount relative to
returns for other asset classes. While some controversy surrounds the methodology used
by Ibbotson-Sinquefield's measurement of returns for small stocks, their work gives a
sense of the long-term rewards for accepting greater equity risk.
Although eighty years of Ibbotson-Sinquefield data show persuasive results, longer
periods of time produce even more dramatic conclusions. Wharton Professor Jeremy
Siegel, in his book Stocks for the Long Run, examines investment returns from[1802 to
2001. By using Ibbotson's recent data to extend Siegel's return series, over the more than
two centuries from 1802 to 2005, a dollar in the U.S. stock market grows to $10.3
million. During the same period, cash investments generate a multiple of only 4.8
thousand. The return-generating power of equity investment over long periods of time
dominates the multiples obtained by investing in bills and bonds as shown in Table 4.2.
As a footnote, gold "bugs" will be disappointed to learn that their favorite precious
metal returned a multiple of only 27, trailing by a large margin the returns of low risk
Treasury bills and only modestly exceeding the 16-fold impact of inflation.
Table 4.2 Equities Provide Astonishing Results in the Very Long Run
Wealth Multiples for U.S. Asset Classes and Inflation December 1802-December 2005
81-82/433
Multiple
16 times
4.8 thousand times
19.5 thousand times
10.3 million times
Asset Class
Inflation
Treasury bills
Treasury bonds
Large-capitalization stocks
Sources: Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation, 2006 Year Book; Jeremy Siegel, Stocks for the Long
Run (New York 2002); Bloomberg.
These findings suggest that long-term investors maximize wealth by investing in high-
return, high-risk equity rather than buying debt instruments of governments and
corporations. As with many broad generalizations, this seemingly obvious conclusion
requires further examination.
...
Market studies focusing only on returns for securities in the United States miss
important information. Recent academic work by Will Goetzmann and Philippe Jorion
on investor experience in other countries reduces confidence in the long-run superiority
of equity investing. At the turn of the twentieth century, active stock markets existed in
Russia, France, Germany, Japan, and Argentina, all of which have been interrupted "
for a variety of reasons, including political turmoil, war, and hyper-inflation. Obviously,
these markets provide little grist for the mill of long-term capital market studies. Even the
most continuous of markets, those in the United States and United Kingdom, were shut
down for several months during World War I."5 Studies of long-term returns in the
United States ignore the fact that investors in foreign markets experienced less favorable
outcomes, with sometimes dramatically worse results.
In addition to the possibility that enthusiasm for equities might be based on parochial
experience, survivorship bias" inflates perceptions of historical returns. One study
suggests that "... the 5 percent real capital appreciation return on U.S. stocks is
exceptional, as other markets have typically returned 3 percent less than U.S. equities."
Were this conclusion to influence expectations for long-run equity returns, the case for
stock investments becomes considerably less compelling.
Ultimately, the argument for an equity bias in a long-term investment portfolio rests
on more than historical experience. Finance theory sensibly teaches that acceptance of
greater risk accompanies an expectation of greater return. While future stock market
returns might not be as robust as they have been for U.S. equity investors, long-term
investors will be well served with an equity bias.
Diversification
Even though market return studies indicate that high levels of equity market exposure
benefit long-term investors, the associated risks come through less clearly. Significant
concentration in a single asset class poses extraordinary risk to portfolio assets.
Fortunately, diversification provides investors with a powerful risk management tool. By
combining assets that vary in response to forces that drive markets, investors create more
efficient portfolios. At a given risk level, properly diversified portfolios provide higher
returns than less well diversified portfolios. Conversely, through appropriate
diversification, a given level of returns can be achieved at lower risk. Harry Markowitz,
pioneer of modern portfolio theory, maintains that portfolio diversification provides
investors with a "free lunch," since risk can be reduced without sacrificing expected
return.
Yale and the Eagle Bank
An extraordinary example of the risk in portfolio concentration comes from a
catastrophic event in the early history of the Yale endowment. An overwhelmingly large,
ill-advised investment in a single bank nearly bankrupted the college, with consequences
that lasted for decades.
In 1811, Yale College treasurer James Hillhouse and his illustrious colleagues, Eli
Whitney, William Woolsey, and Simeon Baldwin, acquired the charter for the formation
of the Eagle Bank of New Haven. At that time, only one other bank served New Haven's
healthy economy and developing merchant class. Hoping to pursue a mission of fostering
industry and commerce, at its opening the Eagle Bank commanded a significant level of
public confidence.
William Woolsey, a shrewd and experienced merchant and banker, served as the bank's
first president, returning to New Haven from a lucrative business career in New York as a
speculative sugar trader, hardware merchandizer, and merchant banker. With Woolsey at
the helm and a roster of New Haven's finest citizens as founders, the financial officers at
Yale were so convinced of the soundness of the bank that they applied for a special
dispensation from the State of Connecticut to invest more than the statutory limit of
$5,000 in the stock of any one bank. Yale not only invested far in excess of the limit, the
trustees also leveraged the college's investment with borrowed funds. In 1825, with the
exception of a few shares in municipal projects, the entire endowment was invested in the
Eagle Bank.
Sadly, Yale's confidence was misdirected. Upon William Woolsey's return to his
business ventures in New York in 1825, he selected George Hoadley, a Yale graduate,
practicing lawyer, and mayor of New Haven, to succeed him as bank president. The
founders of the bank were too busy with other endeavors to oversee Hoadley. In
September of 1825, after Hoadley had loaned out nearly the entire value of the bank in
inadequately collateralized loans, the bubble burst and the Eagle Bank declared
bankruptcy. Yale College lost over $21,000, bringing the total value of the endowment
down to $1,800. Unpaid debts for the college at the time amounted to well over $19,000,
causing Yale president Jeremiah Day to obtain emergency sources of financing. The
collapse of the bank was catastrophic to the City of New Haven, precipitating a
depression in the local economy. In disgrace, George Hoadley quietly moved to
Cleveland, where he finished out his days as a justice.
The Clark Foundation and Avon
While Yale's early nineteenth century portfolio exhibited unusual concentration, similar
situations exist today. Of the fifteen largest foundations in the United States, two (the
Lilly Endowment and the Starr Foundation) hold nearly all assets in a single stock,
another (the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation) holds well over half of assets in a single
stock, and yet another (the Annie E. Casey Foundation) holds over a quarter of assets in a
single stock. Oblivious to the measure of good fortune that contributed to the
undiversified portfolio's rise to the top of the charts, trustees use past success to justify
continuing to ntrate assets in one security. For each institution with a wildly
successful concentrated portfolio, any number of other institutions with undiversified
holdings languish in obscurity. Unfortunately, many single-stock foundations ultimately
experience the costs of holding radically undiversified portfolios.
Even when investors make good faith efforts to diversify, results sometimes disappoint.
In the early 1970s, trustees of the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation decided to reduce
exposure to Avon Products, the company that provided the wherewithal to establish the
institution. By selling shares of Avon to fund a diversified external equity manager, the
trustees hoped to reduce heavy dependence on the fortunes of a single security. The
timing of the decision made exquisite sense, as prices of Avon and other members of the
"Nifty Fifty" had climbed to unprecedented heights in an extraordinary bull market for
large-capitalization growth stocks.!!
The trustees chose J.P. Morgan to manage the portfolio, selecting the era's dominant
money management firm. Pursuing a strategy that had served the firm and its clients well,
Morgan promptly diversified the foundation's assets into other high quality growth
stocks. By exchanging one member of the "Nifty Fifty" for others of the same cohort, the
Clark Foundation's portfolio received little protection from the subsequent dramatic
collapse in quality growth stocks.
Yale's experience with a single security-shares of the Eagle Bank-and the Clark
Foundation's ill-fated investments in the Nifty Fifty provide cautionary tales regarding
portfolio concentration. True diversification requires owning assets that respond
differently to fundamental forces that drive markets.
Stocks and the Great Crash
Even broadly defined asset classes sometimes produce risks too great for investors to bear.
Consider the wealth multiples for small-cap stocks around the time of the Great Crash in
October 1929 shown in Table 4.3.
According to the data in Table 4.3, small stock prices peaked in November 1928. Had
a dollar been invested at the peak, it would have declined 54 percent by December 1929,
an additional 38 percent by December 1930, an additional 50 percent by December 1931,
and a final 32 percent by June 1932. From November 1928 to June 1932, market action
nearly destroyed the original investment. No investor, institutional or individual, could
tolerate the trauma. As market forces turned dollars into dimes, investors sold small-cap
stocks, placed the proceeds in Treasury bills, and swore never to invest in the equity
market again. Of course, selling equities in June of 1932 represented precisely the wrong
response. Ten cents invested at the depths of the Great Depression in small-capitalization
stocks would have grown more than 137,000 fold by December 31, 2005.
85-86/433
Table 4.3 High Risk Assets Hit Occasional Air Pockets
Wealth Multiples for Small Capitalization Equities November 1928-June 1932
Date
Multiple
1.00 times
0.46 times
0.29 times
0.14 times
0.10 times
November 30, 1928
December 31, 1929
December 31, 1930
December 31, 1931
June 30, 1932
Source: Ibbotson Associates, Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation, 2006 Year Book.
The sense of the skepticism with which investors viewed stocks in the 1930s runs
through Robert Lovett's "Gilt-Edged Insecurity," which appeared in the April 3, 1937
edition of The Saturday Evening Post. Lovett begins his examination of historical market
returns by suggesting that his readers "[c]onsider the absurdity of applying the word
security to a bond or a stock." Lovett's analysis showed that an investor buying "100
shares of each of the more popular stocks" at the turn of the century would have turned
nearly $295,000 into just $180,000 by the end of 1936. He concludes by warning his
readers to remember: "(1) that corporations... die easily and frequently; (2) to be extra
careful when everything begins to look good; (3) that you are buying risks and not
securities; (4) that governments break promises just as businesses do; and (5) that no
investments worth having are permanent."6 Lovett's commentary vividly illustrates why
so few investors came up with the dime to invest in small stocks in June of 1932.
Diversifying Strategies
Institutions generally respond to the risk in stocks by holding as much domestic equity as
tolerable, mitigating portfolio volatility by adding significant amounts of bonds and cash
to the mix. At June 30, 2005, the average educational endowment held 53 percent in
domestic equity, 23 percent in domestic fixed income, and 5 percent in cash, for a total of
81 percent in domestic marketable securities.7
The large concentration of assets in bonds and cash, with fully 28 percent of the
average portfolio in these low return assets, creates significant opportunity costs. Instead
of owning equity assets where dollars in the past eighty years grew more than 2,600-fold,
investors diversifying with fixed income assets held positions that grew 100-fold with
corporate bonds, 71-fold with Treasury bonds and 18-fold with cash.
The outsized exposure of more than 80 percent to securities of the U.S. market, with
fully half of assets invested in domestic equities, violates sensible diversification principles.
Committing more than fifty percent of a portfolio to a single asset type-domestic stocks
-exposes investors to unnecessary asset-concentration risk. The significant correlation
between domestic stocks and bonds further exacerbates the consequences of overreliance
on domestic equities. Interest rates play an important role in markets. Increasing rates
definitely cause bond prices to decline and may cause stock prices to decline, eliminating
or reducing the hoped for diversification effects. The converse also applies. Under many
circumstances, the average educational institution has more than four-fifths of the
portfolio driven in the same direction by the same economic factor.
By identifying high-return asset classes that show little correlation with domestic
marketable securities, investors achieve diversification without the opportunity costs of
investing in fixed income. The most common high-return diversifying strategy for a U.S.
investor involves adding foreign equities to the portfolio. Other possibilities include
venture capital, leveraged buyouts, real estate, timber, oil and gas, and absolute return. If
these asset classes provide high equity-like returns in a pattern that differs from the return
pattern of the core asset (U.S. domestic equities), investors create portfolios that offer
both high returns and diversification. Although on an asset-specific basis, higher expected
โบ
returns apparently come with the price of higher expected volatility, the lack of
correlation between individually risky asset classes actually reduces overall portfolio risk.
Diversification represents "a free lunch" that allows investors to reduce risk without
sacrificing expected returns.
The combination of an equity bias and appropriate diversification provides a powerful
underpinning for establishing policy asset allocation targets. Responding to the tenets of
equity bias and diversification, sensible institutions identify a variety of high expected
return assets that derive returns in ways fundamentally dissimilar from one another. By
spreading assets across a variety of asset types, investors diminish the risk that
undiversified exposure to a single market will cause significant damage and enhance the
possibility that well-diversified exposure to a variety of markets will generate high returns
with low levels of risk.
MARKET TIMING
Explicit market timing lies on the opposite end of the spectrum from disciplined
portfolio management. John Maynard Keynes, in a Kings College Investment Committee
memo, wrote that "the idea of wholesale shifts is for various reasons impracticable and
indeed undesirable. Most of those who attempt to, sell too late and buy too late, and do
both too often, incurring heavy expenses and developing too unsettled and speculative a
state of mind." Deliberate short-term deviations from long-term policy targets introduce
substantial risks to the investment process.
On the surface, arguments used to attack market timing sound uncomfortably similar
to those advanced when making asset allocation decisions. For example, investors might
reject market timing because it requires making a few focused, undiversifiable bets. Or,
investors might avoid market timing because of the insurmountable challenges in
identifying and predicting the multitude of variables that influence asset prices. While
similar factors influence both market timing and policy asset allocation, differences in
time frame clearly separate one from the other.
Market timing, defined as a short-term bet against long-term policy targets, requires
being right in the short run about factors that are impossible to predict in the short run.
Yet investors can reasonably deal with the important drivers of returns in the long run as
short-term anomalies disappear into predictable long-term patterns. Sensible investors
avoid concentrated bets against the institution's adopted asset allocation, thereby
eliminating the risk of inflicting serious damage by holding a portfolio inconsistent with
long-term objectives.
Tactical Asset Allocation
In the 1950s, many investors played a market timing game with stock and bond yields,
based on "... -practically an article of faith that good stocks must yield more income than
good bonds..." When dividend yields on stocks exceeded bond yields by a fair margin,
investors viewed stocks as attractive, overweighting equities relative to bonds. Conversely,
when bond yields neared stock yields, investors favored bonds. History provided a solid
foundation for the strategy. "Only for short periods in 1929, 1930, and 1933 [had] stocks
yielded less than government bonds."10 This valuation-based technique worked well until
1958, when stock yields last exceeded bond yields. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, as the
yield advantage of bonds increased relative to stocks, market timers became more invested
in fixed income and less invested in stocks. Of course, investors incurred significant
opportunity losses while futilely waiting for stock yields to signal a buying opportunity.
Ultimately, the failure of the relative yield market timing technique forced its
practitioners to identify an alternative form of employment.
A modern, somewhat more sophisticated version of the 1950s relative yield game,
tactical asset allocation (TAA), moves assets above and below policy weights based on
recommendations of a sophisticated quantitative model. After gaining institutional favor
based on strong performance during the crash of 1987, in subsequent years TAA's appeal
waned, as successes of the late 1980s faded from memory. Even though TAA's
recommendations stem from superficially sensible quantitative disciplines, the system
suffers from the faults of other market timing mechanisms.
A notable problem with standard three-way (stock, bond, and cash) TAA relates to the
resolution of model identified "mispricings." TAA models tend to prefer cash when
short-term interest rates equal or exceed long-term rates, that is in flat or inverted yield
curve environments. When TAA holds significant cash positions, investors receive
meaningful protection in environments where interest rates increase. The increase in rates
causes bond prices to decline and may cause stock prices to decline as well. (While the
relationship between stocks and bonds is complex, higher interest rates generally lead to
lower stock prices.) By holding cash, TAA practitioners protect portfolio assets from
interest-rate-induced declines in bond and stock prices.
In contrast, if investors hold cash as the yield curve moves down sharply, portfolios
might sustain irreversible opportunity losses. Downward shifts in the yield curve result
from bond rallies, which generally cause stocks to rally. TAA investors, stuck with
substantial cash positions, receive modest income returns while bonds and stocks post
significant gains. In this case, losses are irreversible in the sense that while cash originally
appeared to be the cheapest asset class, an across-the-board decline in interest rates
resolved cash's cheapness in a fashion that provided little benefit to holders of cash. In a
declining rate environment, handsome returns to holders of bonds and stocks make the
relatively paltry cash returns a bitter pill for TAA investors to swallow.
Because cash represents a poor asset class for investors with long time horizons, market
timing strategies employing cash pose particularly great dangers to endowment assets. If
investors mistakenly over-weight cash and underweight higher expected return assets,
subsequent rallies in long-term asset prices might cause permanent impairment of value.
While less severe damage may result from mistakes made in timing one high expected
return asset class relative to another, the ultimate consequences depend on disciplined
contrarian responses to initial market timing losses. Such discipline might be a lot to
expect from parties engaged in market timing in the first place.
Rebalancing and the 1987 Market Crash
While relatively few investors admit to explicit pursuit of market timing strategies, most
portfolios suffer from drift as market forces move actual allocations away from target
levels. Circumstances surrounding the market crash in 1987 illustrate the meaningful
costs incurred by failing to conduct disciplined rebalancing activity in the face of dramatic
market moves.
During the period surrounding the 1987 stock market collapse endowment portfolios
first exhibited aspects of disciplined rebalancing in the run up before the crash and then
showed signs of perverse market timing in the carnage of the crash. In June 1987, the
average endowment invested slightly more than 55 percent of assets in domestic equities
and committed almost 37 percent to bonds and cash." The 1987 mid-year allocations
marked the end of a period of extraordinary portfolio stability, as between 1985 and 1987
stock allocations ranged from 55.0 percent to 55.4 percent and fixed income allocations
ranged from 36.7 percent to 36.9 percent. It appears that in the two years prior to June
1987 endowment investors engaged in rebalancing activity, offsetting market price
movements. Since equities outperformed bonds by a margin of 70 percent to 25 percent
for the two-year period, only by leaning against the bull market wind could investors file
three consecutive fiscal year reports indicating essentially constant allocations to domestic
stocks and bonds.
After the October 1987 crash, portfolio stability disappeared as market forces drove
down allocations to stocks and pushed up allocations to bonds. Responding to the
collapse in stock prices with fear, the average endowment manager exacerbated the
market-induced dislocation by selling stocks. Reacting to the rally in high quality bond
prices with greed, the average endowment manager enhanced the market-induced
increases by purchasing more bonds. From June 1987 to June 1988, equity holdings
declined from 55.3 percent to 49.1 percent, more than can be explained by the market
drop during the year. Roughly offsetting the equity decline, fixed income increased from
36.7 percent to 41.9 percent, more than can be explained by the market rally. In
retrospect, educational institutions bought high and sold low, following a poor recipe for
investment success.
By reallocating more than 5 percent of assets from domestic stocks to bonds and cash
in the aftermath of the 1987 market crash, endowment investors incurred significant
opportunity costs as the market staged a reasonably rapid recovery. Even in the face of
stronger prices, fear of the U.S. stock market persisted, as endowment bond and cash
allocations remained above the pre-crash level until 1993. College and university
portfolios incurred substantial opportunity costs by maintaining lower risk portfolios for
years after the stock market crash.
One charitable interpretation of post-crash equity sales involves the possibility that
institutions inadvertently allowed equity allocations to drift above desired levels in the
strong stock market of the early 1980s. Perhaps the 1987 crash highlighted the degree to
which equities dominated institutional portfolios, causing fiduciaries to sell stocks to
reach a lower desired portfolio risk profile. If so, post-crash reductions in equity
allocations represent a belated, costly, inelegant response to excessive portfolio risk.
Another fundamental justification for reduced equity holdings stems from the
possibility that the 1987 crash caused investors to conclude that risk characteristics of
equities differed from previous assumptions. Perhaps past assessments of stock market
variability materially understated true risk. Maybe equity returns exhibit more frequent
extreme moves than market participants previously believed. Certainly, the
unprecedented market collapse forced investors to reassess the character of equity return
patterns, possibly contributing to a portfolio shift from equities to less risky assets.
Unfortunately for those seeking a reasonable explanation for institutional behavior,
increases in stock allocations during the 1990s argue against interpreting November and
December 1987 sales as a rational portfolio adjustment. Investors motivated by greed held
91-92/433
high allocations going into the crash, only to reduce holdings significantly thereafter. As
confidence returned, equity allocations began to rise, reversing the allocation decisions
made only a short time before. Educational institutions, greedy and fearful in turn,
damaged portfolios in their perverse response to the crash in October 1987.
With the benefit of hindsight, post-crash equity purchases made enormous sense,
enriching those with the courage to go against the crowd. In fact, the apparently easy
money made by buying common stocks in late 1987 encouraged investors to follow a
policy of "buying the dips" with increasing enthusiasm.
As the bull market continued its run through the 1990s, the public saw every modest
decline in stock prices as an opportunity to buy equities "on sale." Did investors learn an
important rebalancing lesson from the 1987 stock market crash, or did the relatively
quick rebound in prices point market participants in the wrong direction?
Drawing conclusions from the 1987 stock market crash about the easy profits gained
from "buying the dips" places far too much weight on a shaky foundation, since the
extraordinary circumstances surrounding the October break in markets constitute a
unique occurrence. The extreme one-day decline of 23 percent in the S&P 500 represents
a 25 standard deviation event, an occurrence so rare in a normally distributed variable that
it staggers the imagination. Basing future behavior on the 1987 crash and subsequent
market recovery exposes investors to the danger that less extreme market declines contain
far less information regarding future price behavior. While nearterm profitability of post-
crash equity purchases illustrate a positive aspect of rebalancing activity, investors face the
possibility of confusing the important risk control function of rebalancing with the
unreliable return-oriented activity of "buying the dips."
Excess Volatility
Yale economist Robert Shiller argues that markets exhibit excess volatility. ยน2 That is,
security prices tend to fluctuate more than necessary to respond to fundamental factors,
such as earnings and interest rates, that determine intrinsic value. In other words, "if price
movements were rescaled down... so as to be less variable, then price would do a better
job of forecasting fundamentals." Shiller's self-described "controversial claim" provides
"evidence of a failure of the efficient markets model."13 Anyone attempting to understand
October 1987's market crash from a fundamental perspective sees merit in Shiller's
position.
In a world with excess volatility, investors care about the direction of security price
fluctuations. Price declines provide opportunities to buy and price increases provide
opportunities to sell. Under some circumstances, following a significant decline in price
an asset actually becomes less risky, since it can be acquired more cheaply. The common-
sense conclusion of bottom-fishing investors contrasts with the statistician's conclusion
that a dramatic drop in price increases observed (historical) volatility, implying a higher
risk level for the asset. Of course, price volatility creates opportunity only when prices
change more than necessary to reflect changes in underlying fundamentals.
Real-Time Rebalancing
Frequent rebalancing activity allows investors to maintain a consistent risk profile and to
exploit return-generating opportunities created by excess security price volatility.
Moreover, real-time rebalancing tends to cost less, as trades generally prove
accommodating to the market. Frequent rebalancers buy in the face of immediate
declines and sell in the face of immediate increases, in both cases supplying liquidity for
traders pursuing the opposite, predominant tack. Although few investors commit the
time and resources necessary to conduct real-time rebalancing, an examination of the
benefits of intensive rebalancing provides context for understanding the value of the
strategy.
Consider Yale University's rebalancing activity. Yale possesses a number of advantages
unavailable to most investors. The university's endowment enjoys tax-exempt status,
allowing frequent trading without adverse tax consequences associated with realization of
gains. A sophisticated team of investment professionals manages the funds on a day-to-
day basis, providing the staff support needed for management-intensive activities. Yale's
special tax status and dedicated investment staff permit the university to engage in real-
time rebalancing activity.
Yale's trading activity during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2003 provides some insight
into the potential magnitude of rebalancing profits. During the year, the U.S. equity
market, as measured by the Wilshire 5000, produced a total return of 1.3 percent.
Investors undertaking an annual review of portfolio allocations would likely do little to
rebalance domestic equity holdings (unless returns of other asset classes caused the
93-94/433 >
domestic equity allocation to change markedly). In fact, in Yale's case the overall portfolio
return for the fiscal year amounted to 8.8 percent, implying reasonable stability in
portfolio allocations and suggesting modest annual rebalancing requirements.
For Yale's fiscal 2003, the placid surface of the equity market concealed some powerful
undercurrents. Early in the fiscal year, markets collapsed. In July, the Wilshire 5000 posted
a peak-to-trough decline of more than 18 percent. The market subsequently rebounded,
nearly regaining the July peak in late August with a greater than 19 percent return. From
the August high the market once again fell, declining by more than 19 percent to what
proved the fiscal-year low on October 9th. The hidden currents continued to roil the
markets with a 21 percent increase by November followed by a 14 percent decrease
through March. A powerful surge lifted the market by nearly 27 percent to the fiscal-year
high in mid June, from which the market drifted down to close the twelve-month period
essentially where it started.
The stock market volatility provided numerous opportunities to execute rebalancing
trades. Every substantial drop and every meaningful increase allowed investors to buy the
dips and sell the peaks. During the university's fiscal 2003, rebalancing activity produced
a host of profit-generating transactions.
As a matter of course, at the beginning of every trading day Yale estimates the value of
each of the components of the endowment. When marketable securities asset classes
(domestic equity, foreign developed equity, emerging market equity, and fixed income)
deviate from target allocation levels, the university's investments office takes steps to
restore allocations to target levels. In fiscal year 2003, Yale executed approximately $3.8
billion in domestic equity rebalancing trades, roughly evenly split between purchases and
sales. Net profits from rebalancing amounted to approximately $26 million, representing
a 1.6 percent incremental return on the $1.6 billion domestic equity portfolio.
Even though rebalancing profits produce a nice bonus for investors, the fundamental
motivation for rebalancing concerns adherence to long-term policy targets. In the context
of a carefully considered policy portfolio, rebalancing maintains the desired risk level.
Generating profit while controlling risk represents an unbeatable combination.
Few institutions and even fewer individuals possess the resources to conduct daily
rebalancing of investment portfolios. Yet regardless of the frequency of rebalancing,
fidelity to asset allocation targets proves important as a means of risk control and valuable
as a tool for return enhancement. Thoughtful investors employ rebalancing strategies to
maintain policy asset allocation targets.
Investors hoping to profit in the short run from rebalancing trades face nearly certain
long-run disappointment. Over long periods of time, portfolios allowed to drift with
capital markets returns tend to contain ever increasing allocations to risky assets, as higher
returns cause riskier positions to crowd out other holdings. The fundamental purpose of
rebalancing lies in controlling risk, not enhancing return. Rebalancing trades keep
portfolios at long-term policy targets by reversing deviations resulting from asset class
performance differentials. Disciplined rebalancing activity requires a strong stomach and
serious staying power. Conducted in a significant bear market, rebalancing appears to be a
losing strategy as investors commit funds to assets showing continuing relative price
weakness.
Contrast the positive rebalancing experience of investors in 1987 or Yale's rebalancing
experience in 2003 with the fate suffered by investors in the bear market of 1973 and
1974. Price declines required purchases of equities, followed by further declines that
impaired asset values, which in turn led to further purchases. Losses incurred on
rebalancing trades proved particularly painful as investors second-guessed the wisdom of
buying into a bear market. For investors seeking to maintain long-term targets in the early
1970s, two years of nearly uninterrupted price deterioration produced seemingly
relentless incremental losses.
Rising equity prices provide a similar set of challenges. In a sustained bull market,
rebalancing appears to be a losing strategy, as investors constantly sell assets showing
relative price strength. Years go by without reward, other than the knowledge that the
portfolio embodies the desired risk/reward characteristics.
The alternative of not rebalancing to policy targets causes portfolio managers to
engage in a peculiar trend-following market timing strategy. Like many contrarian
pursuits, rebalancing frequently appears foolish as rum players reap short-term
rewards from going with the flow. Regardless of potentially negative reputational
consequences, serious investors maintain portfolio risk profiles through disciplined
rebalancing policies, avoiding the sometimes expedient appeal of moving with market
forces.
Next Page
Burton Malkiel, in Managing Risk in an Uncertain Era, writes that "we are particularly
averse to the suggestions that a university try to move in and out of the stock market
according to its capacity to forecast market trends. Investors who wish to play this timing
game must possess an unusual degree of prescience about the course of the general
economy, corporate profits, interest rates, and indeed the entire set of international
economic, political, and social developments that affect the securities market. The
existence of such omniscience, to say the least, is hard to document."14 More succinct
advice to those who wish to time the market comes from a nineteenth century cotton
trader: "Some think [the market] will go up. Some think it will go down. I do, too.
Whatever you do will be wrong. Act at once."
Market timing explicitly moves the portfolio away from long-term policy targets,
exposing the institution to avoidable risks. Because policy asset allocation provides the
central means through which investors express return and risk preferences, serious
investors attempt to minimize deviations from policy targets. To ensure that actual
portfolios reflect desired risk and return characteristics, avoid market timing and embrace
rebalancing activity to keep asset classes at targeted levels.
SECURITY SELECTION
Market Efficiency
Investors wishing to beat the market by actively managing portfolios face daunting
obstacles. While no market prices assets precisely at fair value all of the time, most markets
price most assets with reasonable efficiency most of the time, providing few opportunities
for easy gains. Moreover, active management costs increase the hurdle for success as active
investors pay management fees, incur transactions costs, and create market impact.
Intelligent investors approach active strategies with a healthy sense of skepticism.
Sensible active managers favor markets with inefficiently priced asse and avoid those
markets with efficiently priced assets. Unfortunately, no clear measures for pricing
efficiency exist. In fact, financial economists engage in a quasi-religious debate regarding
efficiency, with one end of the spectrum represented by those who believe in the
impossibility of finding risk-adjusted excess returns and the other end of the spectrum by
those who argue that human behavior creates a range of active management
opportunities.
Degree of Opportunity
In the absence of direct measures of market efficiency, active manager behavior provides
clues about the degree of opportunity in various markets. In those markets with limited
opportunities for active management, managers deviate little from the market portfolio,
leading to market-like returns. Why do managers in efficient markets tend to "hug" the
benchmark? In a world of efficiently priced assets, consider the business consequences of
holding portfolios that differ markedly from the market portfolio. Substantial deviations
from the market portfolio's security holdings cause a manager's portfolio results to vary
dramatically from the benchmark. Underperforming managers lose clients and lose assets.
While overachievers may temporarily gain clients and gain assets (and gain public
adulation), because efficient markets present no mispricings for active managers to
exploit, good results stem from luck, not skill. Apparent success proves transitory for
active managers in efficient markets. As a result, over time, managers in efficient markets
gravitate toward "closet indexing," structuring portfolios with only modest deviations
from the market, ensuring both mediocrity and survival.
In contrast, active managers in less efficient markets exhibit greater variability in
returns. In fact, many private markets lack benchmarks for managers to "hug,"
eliminating the problem of closet indexing. Inefficiencies in pricing allow managers with
great skill to achieve great success, while unskilled managers post commensurately poor
results. Hard work and intelligence reap rich rewards in an environment where superior
information and deal flow provide an edge.
Manager behavior causes the magnitude of active management opportunity to relate
to the distribution of actively managed returns in a particular asset class. Any measure of
dispersion provides some sense of the degree of active management opportunity. Table
4.4 shows the spread between the first and third quartiles of returns for actively managed
portfolios, illustrating the extent to which more efficiently priced assets provide less
opportunity for active managers and less efficiently priced assets provide more
opportunity.
Table 4.4 Dispersion of Active Management Returns Identifies Areas of
Opportunity
Asset Returns by Quartile. Ten Years Ending June 30, 2005
Third Quartile
6.9%
10.2
6.5
First Quartile Median
7.4% 7.1%
12.1
11.2
10.5
16.1
11.3
15.6
8.5
17.6
8.4
13.3
-0.4
-14.5
28.7
Asset Class
U.S. fixed income
U.S. equity
International equity
U.S. small-capitalization equity
Absolute return
Real estate
Leveraged buyouts
Venture capital
9.0
14.0
12.5
12.0
8.0
-1.4
Range
0.5%
1.9
4.0
4.8
7.1
9.2
13.7
43.2
Sources: Data for marketable securities are from Russell/Mellon. The absolute return, real estate, leveraged buyout,
and venture capital data are from Cambridge Associates. Real estate, leveraged buyout, and venture capital data
represent returns on funds formed between 1995 and 1999, excluding more recent funds so that immature
investments will not bias results downward.
High quality fixed income securities, arguably the most efficiently priced asset in the
world, trade in markets dominated by savvy financial institutions. Since nobody (possibly
excepting the Federal Reserve) knows where interest rates will be, few managers employ
interest rate anticipation strategies. Without potentially powerful differentiating bets on
interest rates, institutional portfolios tend to exhibit market-like interest rate sensitivity,
or duration. As a result, managers generally limit themselves to modest security selection
decisions, causing returns for most active managers to mimic benchmark results. The
spread between first and third quartile results for active fixed income managers measures
an astonishingly small 0.5 percent per annum for the decade ending June 30, 2005.
Large capitalization equities represent the next rung of the efficiency ladder, with a
range of 1.9 percent between top and bottom quartiles. Stocks provide more difficult
pricing challenges than bonds. Instead of discounting relatively certain fixed income cash
flows, valuation of equities involves discounting more-difficult-to-project corporate
earnings. The greater volatility in equity markets contributes to the wider active manager
spread. Less efficiently priced foreign developed equities exhibit a first-to-third-quartile
range of 4.0 percent per annum, while small-capitalization stocks in the United States
show a range of 4.8 percent per annum over the decade. The progression of degree of
opportunity across types of marketable securities makes intuitive sense.
The radical break comes when moving from liquid public to illiquid private
opportunities. Absolute return, real estate, leveraged buyouts, and venture capital exhibit
dramatically broader dispersions of returns. For the ten-year period, absolute return
shows a range of 7.1 percent between first and third quartiles, while real estate and
leveraged buyouts exhibit even more extreme 9.2 percent and 13.7 percent per annum
spreads. Venture capital captures the dispersion prize with a stunning 43.2 percent first-
to-third quartile range.
Selecting top quartile managers in private markets leads to much greater reward than
in public markets. In the extreme case, choosing a first quartile fixed income manager
adds a meager 0.3 percent per annum relative to the median result. In contrast, the first
quartile venture capitalist surpasses the median by 30.1 percent per annum, providing a
much greater contribution to portfolio results. Ironically, identifying superior managers
in the relatively inefficiently priced private markets proves less challenging than
identifying skillful players in the efficiently priced marketable securities markets.
Active Manager Returns
Regardless of the scope of active management opportunities, investors face serious
headwinds in the race to beat the market. In the two most significant institutional asset
classes, domestic fixed income and domestic equity, fee-adjusted median manager returns
fall somewhere in the neighborhood of benchmark results. As shown in Table 4.5, in the
extremely efficiently priced U.S. bond market, the median fixed income manager loses 0.2
percent per year net of fees relative to the benchmark, while a first quartile manager ekes
out a gain of only 0.1 percent per annum. Active fixed income management fails
miserably. Before managing bonds actively, investors should ponder Warren Buffett's
famous dictum: "Remember, if you are at a poker table and can't identify the patsy, you
are the patsy."
Table 4.5 Efficiently Priced Markets Challenge the Average Active Manager
Median Returns Relative to Benchmark. Ten Years Ending June 30, 2005
Median Return Benchmark Estimated Fees Net-of-Fee Relative Return
Asset Class
U.S. fixed income
U.S. equity
U.S. small-
7.1%
11.2
14.0
6.9%
9.9
12.9
0.4%
0.8
0.9
-0.2%
0.5
0.2
99-100/433
capitalization equity
Sources: Data on fees from Cambridge Associates Investment Manager Database, rounded to the nearest ten basis
points. Benchmarks: Lehman Brothers U.S. Government Credit Index for U.S. Fixed Income, S&P 500 Index for
U.S. Equity, and S&P 600 Index for U.S. Small Cap Equity.
Domestic equity markets produce slightly more hopeful results. With fee adjustments,
the median active manager exceeds the benchmark by 0.5 percent per year. A first quartile
manager adds real value, however, exceeding the benchmark by 1.4 percent per annum net
of fees. The median small-capitalization manager beats the market by a scant 0.2 percent
per annum. In contrast, a first quartile manager adds 2.3 percent per annum, reflecting
the greater investment opportunity in less efficiently priced securities.
In the case of domestic marketable securities, the proximity of median returns and
benchmarks tells the same story for bonds, stocks, and small-cap stocks. Avoid active
management, or undertake active strategies with great caution and realistic expectations.
Consider the markets in which the various securities trade. Domestic fixed income
operates in a market dominated by institutions. The returns contained in the active
manager universe represent the results of sophisticated investors trading against
sophisticated investors. Traders gain an advantage with extraordinary difficulty. As a
result, active managers post results in a narrow range, with median managers losing
relative to the benchmark and top quartile managers posting exceedingly modest
incremental returns. The highly efficient, highly competitive fixed income market stands
at one end of the continuum.
Domestic equities trade in a brutally competitive environment, but with a greater
degree of opportunity. As might be expected in the negative sum game of active
management, the median domestic equity manager produces market-like returns. That
said, top quartile managers of both large-capitalization and small-capitalization stocks
appear to add value net of fees, with less efficiently priced small-cap securities offering the
greater opportunity.
Greater inefficiency in the market environment may not lead to greater average success.
Private markets provide a case in point. Median results for venture capital and leveraged
buyouts dramatically trail those for marketable equities, despite the higher risk and
greater illiquidity of private investing. Over the decade ending June 30, 2005, deficits
relative to the S&P 500 amounted to 11.3 percent annually for venture capital, and 1.9
percent annually for leveraged buyouts, numbers that would be higher after risk
adjustment. In order to justify including private equity in the portfolio, managers must
select top quartile managers. Anything less fails to compensate for the time, effort, and
risk entailed in the pursuit of nonmarketable investments.
Survivorship Bias
Although comparisons of active management returns to benchmark results already paint
a bleak picture, managers hoping to beat the market face a challenge even greater than
suggested by a first reading of the data. Survivorship bias causes active managers as a
group to appear more successful than would be indicated by a true picture of reality, since
current data on manager returns contain only the results of the strong (survivors), having
purged the returns of the weak (failures).
Errors of underinclusion and overinclusion bias manager performance data, limiting
the usefulness of consultant reports in understanding active management results.
Underinclusion occurs when managers disappear without a trace, while overinclusion
occurs when new entrants contribute historical results to the database.
Compilations of return data generally include only results of managers active at the
time of the study. Discontinued products and discredited managers disappear, coloring
the return data with an optimistic tint. Were the generally poor results of nonsurvivors
included in the database, the challenge of beating the market would appear even more
daunting.
Even if the data gatherer undertakes to include results of failed managers, the figures
provide reasonable guidance only when considering returns on a year-by-year basis. The
shortest time frame produces the highest quality data, because the number of dropouts
tends to be smaller for the shorter time periods. More serious problems arise when
examining results spanning several years, since more managers disappear during any given
multiple-year period. Because managers tend appear after pos
poor relative
results, multiple-year comparisons suffer from return inflation driven by the superior
results of survivors.
Errors of overinclusion arise when data gatherers add new firms to the database and
incorporate the new additions' historical records. Since the new entrants necessarily
produced superior results to attract the attention of the institutional investment
community, the addition of the new entrants' historical track record (a.k.a. backfill bias)
provides an artificial boost to reported active management returns.
An examination of investment return data produced by the Russell Investment Group
illustrates in high relief the impact of survivorship bias on reported returns. Russell, a
highly regarded consulting firm, compiles and publishes one of the most widely used
investment return databases.
Russell's database suffers significant survivorship bias. Consider the U.S. equity
median manager returns as recorded in Table 4.6. In 1996, according to Russell, the
median U.S. equity manager produced a return of 22.4 percent based on reports from a
sample size of 307. As failing managers departed and up-and-coming managers entered,
the reported results for 1996 steadily improved. By 2005, the reported median manager
return for 1996 jumped to 23.5 percent, more than one percentage point above the
originally recorded result. Strikingly, the 2005 report on 1996 includes only 177
observations, a full 130 fewer than the 1996 report.
The Russell data suffer from overinclusion and underinclusion. Note that from 1997
to 1998, the number of managers increases by nine, indicating some degree of backfill
bias. Because Russell does not provide year-by-year information on gross additions to and
gross subtractions from the database, observers do not have the information necessary to
gauge the relative importance of entries and departures. That said, the more than 40
percent decline over ten years in the number of firms reporting 1996 results indicates that
departures of failed managers dominate the survivorship scene.
Precise assessment of the impact of survivorship bias on the Russell database proves
impossible. Poor returns of declining managers disappear. Strong returns of rising
managers appear. Yet some idea of the magnitude of survivorship bias comes from the
deviations between the originally reported returns and the later-reported, biased returns.
The deviations, outlined in Table 4.6, range from an increase in the reported median
return for 2000 of 4.3 percentage points, which transformed an originally reported
median loss of 3.1 percent into a later revised median gain of 1.2 percent, to no change for
the median return in 2005, the final year of the analysis. On average, survivorship bias
increases the reported median returns by 1.6 percent per year.
Table 4.6 Survivorship Bias Paints an Unrealistic Picture of U.S. Equity Returns
U.S. Equity Manager Median Returns
1997 1999 1996
1942
1996 22.4%
1907 22 0% 30.6%
1%
1908 23.3% 81.5% 23.0%
1990 27.4% 31 6% 24.5% 16%
2000 23.5% 21.0% 25.9% 20.1%
2001 23.5% 31.7% 21.4% 20.0% -3.3% -10.8%
2002 23.8% 31.5% 25.9% 211% -2.0%
2000 27.5% 16% 25.5% 20.5%, 0.7%
2004 23.5% 15% 23.4% 20.2% 0.1%
-9.9% 22.1%
17% -21.3% 300%
6.3% -21.2% 30.2% 110%
2005 21.5% 31.5% 25.3% 20.6% 17% -70% 21.0% 302 12.3% 24%
Difference
0.0%
%
3996
307
1997 303
1996 312
-1999 278 367
2000
255 294
2001 237 264
2002 230
202
230
211
2003 205
2004 168
2005 177
Nel change
199
126
-130 -127
225 21% LTS
365
1334
323
200 341
285
253
233
221
Number of Reporting Managers
Year of Return
190M 1999 20MP3 2001
-142
Year of Return
352
346 361
369
263
331
352
325
292
236
205
47
1.2%
47
2003 2004 2005
0.2% 0.4%
2002 2003
-23
793
398 412
373 403 424
401
423
767
361
389
2004 2005
44%
n
41
471
Source: Frank Russell Company
One imperfect estimate of the longer term impact of survivorship bias comes from
linking the annual median returns with and without survivorship bias. The imperfection
of the measure stems from the fact that linked median returns do not (except by
coincidence) represent the experience of any individual manager. Even if the linked
returns by chance reflected an individual manager's record, that manager would not likely
represent the median. Yet applying the same technique of linking medians both to the
data with survivorship bias and to the data without survivorship bias produces a rough-
justice estimate of the magnitude of the impact.
Fully Loaded Active Manager Hurdles
The cumulative impact of manager fees, survivorship bias, and backfill bias completely
transforms the active management picture. The results, contained in Table 4.7,
disappoint advocates of market-beating strategies. Even in the benchmark-hugging world
of fixed income, survivorship bias subtracts an estimated 0.2 percent from already
disappointing ten-year active returns. Adding the survivorship adjustment to the post-fee
active management deficit of 0.2 percent produces a median active shortfall of 0.4 percent
103-104/433 >
managers.
relative to the benchmark return. The market poses a tough test for active
After accounting for survivorship bias, the domestic equity net-of-fee active
management advantage of 0.5 percent morphs into a deficit of 1.2 percent per annum,
changing an optimistic story into a pessimistic tale. Simple and cheap benchmark
matching strategies crush most stock market mavens.
Survivorship bias in distributions of active manager returns fundamentally alters
investor attitudes toward active management. Data indicating that the majority of
managers beat the index encourage investors to play the active management game, while
numbers showing a preponderance of managers failing to match index returns discourage
active management. The positive bias introduced by survivor-ship bias no doubt leads to
excessive confidence in active management strategies.
Table 4.7 Estimated Survivorship Bias Adjustments Reduce Appeal of Active
Management
Years Ending June 30, 2005
Asset Class
U.S. fixed
income
U.S. equity
Net-of-Fee Relative
Return
-0.2%
Estimated Survivorship
Impact
-0.2%
Estimated Relative
Return
-0.4%
0.5%
-1.7%
*Estimated survivorship bias impact represents the difference between: (a) the linked annual median manager
returns with survivorship bias; and (b) the linked annual median manager returns without survivorship bias.
-1.2%
Consider the numbers that institutional investors use to evaluate active managers.
Shown in Table 4.8, the pre-fee, survivorship-bias-inflated numbers encourage would-be
market beaters. Active fixed income management appears to be a winning strategy, with
nearly three-quarters of managers besting the benchmark. Adjustments for fees and
survivorship bias flip the odds and reduce the chance of winning to less than one-fifth.
The naรฏve comparison shows 80 percent of domestic equity managers beating the market.
Adjustments for fees and survivorship reduce the chance of winning to less than one
quarter. In the aggregate, fee-collecting asset managers win at the expense of fee-paying
institutional investors.
A cynic might argue that the money management industry benefits from inflating
returns in databases used to assess active managers. Both the active managers and the
consultants that compile data on active management want to encourage clients to engage
active managers. Painting an unrealistically rosy picture of past active management
successes no doubt motivates many investors to pursue the all-too-often-false promise of
market-beating returns.
A further note regarding the efficacy of active management relates to the dollar value
added by purported market-beating strategies. Simple return numbers tend to overstate
value added since early strong results, necessary to attract institutional interest, generally
apply to relatively small amounts of money. As size is the enemy of performance, more
established managers with greater funds under management tend to produce less eye-
catching results. Because investment management return compilations weight each
manager equally, the new managers (presumably with smaller portfolios) exert
disproportionate influence in the manager rankings. A dollar-weighted evaluation of
active management would no doubt provide even less encouragement to those hoping to
employ market-beating strategies.
Table 4.8 Naรฏve Performance Comparisons Encourage Active Management
Fully Adjusted Returns Consider Fees and Survivorship Bias Ten Years Ending June 30,
2005
Asset Class
Median Benchmark Percentile
Return
Rank
7.1%
74
6.9%
U.S. fixed
income
80
12.4%
U.S. equity
11.2%
23
Benchmarks: Lehman Brothers U.S. Government Credit Index for U.S. Fixed Income and S&P 500 Index for U.S.
Equity.
Note: Benchmark burdles include estimates for fees and survivorship bias.
Fully Adjusted Fully Adjusted Benchmark
Benchmark Hurdle
Hurdle Rank
7.5%
18
9.9%
In an ironic twist, survivorship bias causes active managers to appear less successful
relative to peers than reality would indicate. Consider the U.S. equity manager that
preserves capital in 2000. According to results reported in 2000, as shown in Table 4.6, a
zero percent return handily beats the -3.1 percent median result. As survivorship issues
inexorably alter the landscape, by 2005 the 2000 median return morphs into a gain of 1.2
percent. As time passed, the erstwhile median-beating zero percent return moves from the
respectable second quartile to the not-so-respectable third quartile. Survivorship bias
< 105-106/433
darkens the relative performance picture.
Active portfolio managers face high hurdles, which require that investors approach
purported market-beating strategies with great skepticism. Issues of survivorship bias
cloud understanding of historical records, causing general problems in evaluating the
efficacy of active management strategies and specific problems in assessing individual
manager performance. After adjusting for fees and survivorship bias, investors face long
odds on winning the domestic marketable securities active management game. In the
world of marketable securities, passive management provides the obvious low-cost
alternative to high-cost active management. If investors undertake active approaches,
focusing on less efficient markets increases the chance of realizing substantial gains. In the
least efficient private markets, no passive alternative exists. Even were a passive alternative
available, market-like results would likely disappoint. In sum, sensible investors engage in
active management with reasonable caution and realistic expectations.
Liquidity
Serious managers who attempt to identify inefficiencies frequently gravitate toward
relatively illiquid markets, since rewarding investments tend to reside in dark corners, not
in the glare of floodlights. Such out-of-the-way, undiscovered opportunities receive little
attention from Wall Street, which thrives on markets that generate large trading volumes.
Market players seek liquid positions, allowing immediate disposition of yesterday's
loser and rapid acquisition of today's hot prospect. Speculators and asset gatherers pay a
premium price for liquid assets, expecting markets to accommodate reversal of a trade
with immediacy and with little or no impact on price.
Illiquidity induces appropriate, long-term behavior. Rather than relying on liquid
markets to trade out of mistakes, investors in illiquid securities enter into long-term
arrangements, purchasing part ownership in a business with which they have to live. As a
consequence, increased care,
ness, and discipline represent hallmarks of
successful investors in less liquid assets.
By avoiding the highly liquid securities favored by market players, serious active
investors focus on much more interesting investments. In embracing less liquid assets,
investors often identify opportunities to establish positions at meaningful discounts to
fair value.
Full Faith and Credit Obligations
Examples of illiquid opportunities in marketable securities abound. In the realm of full
faith and credit obligations of the U.S. government, otherwise identical bonds trade at
different prices solely because market liquidity differs. The most actively traded Treasury
bonds, so-called on-the-run issues, command a price premium, which produces yields as
much as 5 to 10 basis points below those of off-the-run bonds. Based on current issuance
patterns by the government, on-the-run offerings carry terms to maturity of two, five, ten,
and thirty years. When the Treasury auctions a new ten-year bond, market attention shifts
from the old ten-year instrument to the new. Since the premium enjoyed by on-the-run
issues relates solely to superior market liquidity, the premium price disappears once a new
issue supplants the old.
Regular opportunities exist to purchase full faith and credit instruments of the U.S.
government at spreads of 40 to 50 basis points above otherwise comparable, but more
liquid Treasury issues. Because such offerings tend to contain structural complexities,
cautious investors undertake careful due diligence before committing funds. Moreover,
opportunities tend to be relatively small, requiring portfolio managers to "fill a bathtub
with a teaspoon." Nonetheless, dogged pursuit of unusual, illiquid securities can result in
the accumulation of an attractively priced portfolio of high quality assets.
Markets occasionally offer extraordinary opportunities to investors willing to accept
illiquidity. In the aftermath of a market panic in the fall of 1998, less frequently traded
assets provided enormous returns relative to highly liquid positions. On November 12,
1998, an intermediate term off-the-run Treasury issue, the 57/s's of February 2004,
yielded 18ยน/2 basis points more than the on-the-run 4ยน/4's of November 2003.
Beyond the extremely high reward for accepting modest illiquidity in an off-the-run
Treasury issue, in late 1998, investors willing to invest in a private placement backed by
the full faith and credit of the United States faced incredible opportunity. The Overseas
Private Investment Corporation, an agency of the United States devoted to promoting
economic growth in developing nations, offered securities with an effective maturity date
of March 2004 that carried a spread of more than 100 points over the comparable on-the-
run Treasury issue. Receiving a full percentage point in yield over Treasuries for simply
bearing the illiquidity of a private placement raises serious questions about rationality of
107-108/433
markets.
Even in times of normalcy, investors receive unreasonably large incremental returns in
illiquid securities. For example, in early 2006, investors could consider bonds issued by
National Archives Facility Trust, acting through the National Archives and Records
Administration, an independent government agency devoted to preservation, appraisal,
and regulation of the disposition of the permanently valuable records of the United States
government. The bonds, with an effective maturity date of September 2019 and a coupon
of 8.5 percent, carried a spread of more than 45 basis points over the comparable on-the-
run Treasury issue. The National Archives issued approximately $300 million of bonds, a
small figure relative to a comparably timed ten-year U.S. Treasury issue of approximately
$22.5 billion. Yet patient investors received a reward of almost a half of a percentage point
in yield over Treasuries for simply bearing the illiquidity of a small issue of the United
States government.
Emerging Market Debt
In emerging markets, U.S. dollar-denominated debt of sovereign issuers frequently trades
at a substantial premium to non-dollar debt of the same issuer. This phenomenon
presents itself most dramatically in times of crisis, when investors place extraordinary
value on the greater liquidity of U.S. dollar-denominated instruments. To arbitrage this
discrepancy investors require only a set of currency forward contracts to eliminate the
foreign exchange risk. Arbitrageurs can buy relatively cheap non-dollar debt, sell relatively
expensive dollar debt, and eliminate currency risk with forward foreign exchange
transactions. Investors paying a premium for dollar-denominated debt create an attractive
opportunity for harder working investors.
Throughout 1998, investors found some extraordinary investments amid dislocations
caused by the collapse in Asian markets. While the successful resolution of many
investments depended on market recovery, other positions promised almost certain
rewards to investors. Samsung, a highly leveraged Korean diversified electronics
manufacturer, issued debt in a variety of currencies including U.S. dollars, Korean won,
Japanese yen, and German marks. Dollar-denominated bonds generally traded at
premium prices, reflecting superior liquidity characteristics. In the fall, pricing
discrepancies reached an extreme with Samsung 9.75 percent dollar bonds due May 2003
trading at a yield to maturity of 16 percent (approximately 1,200 basis points over U.S.
Treasuries), and Samsung 3.3 percent yen bonds due April 2003 trading at a yield of 18
percent (approximately 1,700 basis points over Japanese government bonds). Investors
could create a stream of dollar cash flows by buying the relatively cheap yen bond and
swapping all future yen flows for dollars. By using the forward currency markets to
translate the Samsung yen cash flows into dollars, investors created a synthetic dollar asset
with a yield to maturity of 21 percent. The spread between the synthetic bond yield of 21
percent and the Samsung dollar bond yield of 16 percent rewarded arbitrageurs who
purchased the relatively cheap synthetic dollar asset cash flows and sold the relatively
expensive dollar bond.VI If spreads narrow, the investor unwinds the trade with a profit; if
not, the investor collects a stream of payments until the bonds mature. By applying
modest amounts of leverage to the trade, investors could expect holding period returns in
the neighborhood of 24 percent, while without leverage the position carried an 18
percent return.
Sallie Mae Stock
Different classes of equity frequently trade at prices reflecting, inter alia, liquidity
differences. The Student Loan Marketing Association ("Sallie Mae"), established in 1973
to provide liquidity for entities involved in programs supporting the credit needs of
students, originally raised equity capital from institutions participating in the Federal
Government's Guaranteed Student Loan Program. In 1983, creation of a new class of
more broadly held nonvoting stock increased the company's equity base, funding a
corporate growth program designed to meet the needs of hundreds of thousands of
students. The newly issued nonvoting stock traded at a premium that generally ranged
between 15 percent and 20 percent, a spread attributed by market participants to the
illiquidity of the original shares. In an attempt to reduce the discount, Sallie Mae made
regular offers to convert the cheaper, less liquid voting stock to the more expensive, more
liquid nonvoting stock. The discount persisted despite annual conversion of between 28
percent and 41 percent of shares tendered from 1984 to 1989. Curiously, a substantial
number of shareholders who owned voting shares failed to take advantage of the
opportunity. During the final tender offer in March 1989, at the height of market
participant familiarity with the program, of the 8.7 million shares outstanding, 1.5
109-110/433 >
million shares ignored an offer of $91.875 in cash for shares trading at $83.50, exhibiting
behavior difficult to reconcile with notions of market efficiency. In 1991, Congress
authorized creation of a single class of stock for Sallie Mae, eliminating the discount and
removing a trading opportunity for arbitrageurs willing to play in less liquid markets.
Illiquidity and Information
Less information tends to be available on illiquid securities, creating an opportunity to be
rewarded for uncovering insights that are not reflected in a stock's market price. Highly
liquid large-capitalization stocks receive widespread coverage, generating enormous
amounts of publicly available information. During calendar year 2006, Exxon Mobil, the
largest stock by capitalization, was covered by twenty-two Wall Street analysts and was
mentioned 659 times in the Wall Street Journal. In contrast, Avistar Communications,
the 5,000th company by market capitalization, had no research analysts and Wall Street
Journal references totaled only three.
Table 4.9 Large Companies Receive More Intense Research Scrutiny
Small Companies Offer Opportunities to Develop an Information "Edge"
Companies Capitalization Average Market
Average Number Average Number of Wall
Rank
Capitalization of Analysts Street Journal Citations
Exxon Mobil Corp
General Electric
Co
Microsoft Corp
Citigroup Inc
Bank of America
Corp
US Bancorp
United
Technologies Corp
Qualcomm Inc 50-54
Medtronic Inc
Tyco International
Ltd
1-5
Capital One
Financial Corp
114
$327.5
Billion
$62.2
Billion
25
24
954
119
Valero Energy Corp
Carnival Corp/Plc (Usa)
Navistar International Corp
Teleflex Inc
Dresser-Rand Group Inc
Aspen Insurance Holdings Ltd
Big Lots Inc
Avistar Communications Corp
Daily Journal Corp
Beverly National Corp
Antares Pharma Inc
JI Halsey Corp
Sources: Bloomberg and The Wall Street Journal Online
1000-1004
5000-5004
Billion
$2.5
Billion
$63.7
Million
7 10
01
At first glance, Exxon Mobil, which operates a complex set of global businesses,
appears to present a great opportunity for active managers. In fact, security analysts face a
tough challenge in developing an "edge" in light of competition from other analysts, all of
whom benefit from mountains of publicly available information. With Avistar
Communications, the bottom-up stock analyst finds greater opportunity. Information
will no doubt be harder to obtain, but its value will be enhanced by its proprietary nature.
Obviously, private markets present more extreme information advantages. Wall Street
research analysts do not follow private companies. Press coverage tends to be less intense,
in part because less information becomes public through government-mandated
regulatory filings. The lack of easily obtainable information about private companies
poses a challenge and creates an opportunity. Superior information flows lie at the heart
of private investing, contributing to the results of all successful partnerships.
Liquidity's Ephemeral Nature
Investors prize liquidity because it allows trading in and out of securities. Unfortunately,
liquidity tends to evaporate when most needed. The crash of October 1987, described in
the Report of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisms, provides a case in point:
"as the rate of decline accelerated on October 19, the efficiency with which the equity
market functioned deteriorated markedly. By the late afternoon of October 19, market
makers on the major stock exchanges appear to have largely abandoned serious attempts
to stem the downward movement in prices. In the futures and options markets, market
makers were not a significant factor during that time.... Price changes and trading
activity were highly erratic from late Monday afternoon through most of the day on
Tuesday, October 20, as market makers were overwhelmed by selling.... Realistically, in
the face of October's violent shifts in selling demand for equity-related securities, a
rational downward transition in stock prices was not possible. Market makers possessed
neither the resources nor the willingness to absorb the extraordinary volume of selling
demand that materialized."15 Just when investors most needed liquidity, it disappeared.
John Maynard Keynes argues in The General Theory that "[o]f the maxims of
orthodox finance none, surely, is more antisocial than the fetish of liquidity, the doctrine
that it is a positive virtue on the part of investment institutions to concentrate their
resources upon the holding of "liquid" securities. It forgets that there is no such thing as
liquidity of investment for the community as a whole."16
Keynes toyed with the idea of reducing market liquidity to increase the prevalence of
long-term investing. He writes "[t]he spectacle of modern investment markets has
sometimes moved me towards the conclusion that to make the purchase of an investment
permanent and indissoluble, like marriage, except by reason of death or other grave cause,
might be a useful remedy for our contemporary evils. For this would force the investor to
direct his mind to the long-term prospects and to those only."17
Success matters, not liquidity. If private, illiquid investments succeed, liquidity follows
as investors clamor for shares of the hot initial public offering. In public markets, as once-
illiquid stocks produce strong results, liquidity increases as Wall Street recognizes
progress. In contrast, if public, liquid investments fail, illiquidity follows as investor
interest wanes. Portfolio managers should fear failure, not illiquidity.
Value Orientation
Investment success follows most reliably from pursuing value-based strategies, in which
investors acquire assets at prices below fair value, "buying dollars for fifty cents." Investors
who wish to implement value oriented programs require unusual skill, intelligence, and
energy. Without a significant edge relative to other market participants, investors face
likely failure. Moreover, value opportunities tend to be out of favor with mainstream
investors, demanding courage of conviction to initiate and maintain positions.
Tobin's "q"
John Maynard Keynes in The General Theory articulated this concept of value: "... there
is no sense in building up a new enterprise at a cost greater than that at which a similar
existing enterprise can be purchased; whilst there is an inducement to spend on a new
project what may seem an extravagant sum, if it can be floated off... at an immediate
profit."18 James Tobin and William Brainard formalized this concept as "q," the ratio of
market value to replacement cost.
In equilibrium, under a reasonable set of conditions, Tobin-Brainard "q" equals one as
the market value of assets equals replacement cost. If market value exceeds replacement
cost, a "q" greater than one encourages entrepreneurs to create companies, offering them
for sale at an immediate profit in the public markets. If replacement cost exceeds market
value, a
of less than one leads entrepreneurs to acquire corporate assets in the public
market instead of building enterprises from the ground up. Value investors thrive in
environments where "q" measures less than one.
Margin of Safety
Renowned investor Benjamin Graham distills the central tenet of value investing into a
single concept-margin of safety-the cushion in value created by owning shares of a
company with "expected earning power considerably above the going rate for bonds."
Graham notes: "The margin-of-safety idea becomes [most] evident when we apply it to
the field of undervalued or bargain securities. We have here, by definition, a favorable
difference between price on the one hand and indicated or appraised value on the other.
That difference is the safety margin. It is available for absorbing the effect of
miscalculations or worse than average luck. The buyer of bargain issues plates particular
emphasis on the ability of the investment to withstand adverse developments. For in most
such cases he has no real enthusiasm about the company's prospects. True, if the
prospects are definitely bad the investor will prefer to avoid the security no matter how
low the price. But the field of undervalued issues is drawn from the many concerns-
perhaps a majority of the total-for which the future appears neither distinctly promising
nor distinctly unpromising. If these are bought on a bargain basis, even a moderate
113-114/433
decline in the earning power need not prevent the investment from showing satisfactory
results. The margin of safety will then have served its proper purpose."
"19
In today's highly efficient securities markets, few opportunities exist to acquire assets
at less than a fair price. Even with twenty-twenty hindsight, investors may not know
whether positions were purchased below intrinsic value. Adjusting for risk and assessing
the impact of subsequent external events, positive or negative, complicate evaluation of
the initial acquisition decision. Because of the difficulty of proving the efficacy of value-
investing strategies, investors accept the approach almost as an article of faith.
Perhaps the most compelling argument for value-based investment approaches rests on
contrarian principles. Markets frequently move to extremes, with high valuations for the
popular and low valuations for the out-of-favor. By looking for opportunity in neglected
securities, contrarian investors increase the likelihood of identifying profitable
investments.
Yet mindless contrarian investing poses dangers to portfolios. Sometimes popular
companies deserve premium valuations. Sometimes out-of-favor companies deserve
discounted valuations. Identifying out-of-favor assets serves as a starting point for serious
investors, leading to further analysis. Only if careful analysis confirms expectations of
superior future performance should investors purchase securities.
Purchasing stocks with low price-to-earnings ratios or price-to-book ratios represents a
naรฏve strategy. Simply selecting the cheapest stocks, measured relative to current earnings
or book value, neglects important factors such as the quality of a business's management
and future earnings prospects.
Historically, naรฏve value strategies have delivered superior rates of return, while
exposing investors to relatively high levels of fundamental risk.20 Jeremy Grantham of
Grantham Mayo Van Otterloo warns of the "sixty year flood" that may wipe out years of
gains garnered by simply purchasing the cheapest stocks. True value can be acquired by
purchasing assets at prices below fair value, a forward-looking concept that considers
anticipated cash flows with adjustment for the level of risk.
Value investors need not limit choices to low growth or distressed companies. Even
high growth industries contain companies with appealing valuations. One technology
stock manager, Sy Goldblatt of S Squared, when attending industry conferences, avoids
the rooms crowded with analysts pursuing the "flavor of the month." Instead, operating
out of the mainstream, he meets with companies that cannot attract an audience. While
many find the concepts of value and technology strange bedfellows, combining the two
creates a powerful combination. Value investors seek to purchase companies at a discount
to fair value, not to purchase low growth or distressed assets per se.
Benjamin Graham recognized that careful investors might identify value in unusual
precincts. He writes: "... the growth-stock approach may supply as dependable a margin
of safety as is found in the ordinary investment-provided the calculation of the future is
conservatively made, and provided it shows a satisfactory margin in relation to the price
paid. The danger in a growth-stock program lies precisely here. For such favored issues the
market has a tendency to set prices that will not be adequately protected by a conservative
projection of future earnings. The margin of safety is always dependent on the price paid.
It will be large at one price, small at some higher price, nonexistent at some still higher
price. If, as we suggest, the average market level of most growth stocks is too high to
provide an adequate margin of safety for the buyer, then a simple technique of diversified
buying in this field may not work out satisfactorily. A special degree of foresight and
judgment will be needed, in order that wise individual selections may overcome the
hazards inherent in the customary market level of such issues as a whole. "21 While
Graham recognizes the occasional opportunity to identify growth stocks exhibiting a
margin of safety, value oriented investors choosing among out-of-favor securities face a
richer set of attractive portfolio alternatives.
Contrarian Investing
Superb opportunities to purchase assets at prices significantly below fair value tend to be
hidden in deeply out-of-favor market segments. At market bottoms, the broad consensus
so loathes certain asset types that investors brave enough to make commitments find their
sanity and sense of responsibility questioned. In fact, Keynes writes of the contrarian
investor that "... it is in the essence of his behavior that he should be eccentric,
unconventional, and rash in the eyes of average opinion."22 Managers searching among
unloved opportunities face greater chances of success, along with almost certain tirades of
criticism.
The real estate market in the early 1990s provided obvious opportunities to acquire
dollars at a discount. In January 1994, Yale participated in the purchase of a real estate
115-116 / 423
asset with a lease that promised a rate of return of 14.8 percent. Over the term of the lease
the return would be fully realized in cash, paying back the entire investment along with a
profit and leaving a valuable asset in the partnership's possession. Even without ascribing
any residual value to the property, the real estate return of nearly 15 percent exceeded, by a
dramatic margin, comparable returns on U.S. Treasury Notes of approximately 5.75
percent. Based on the above facts, the transaction may or may not have represented good
value. Perhaps the risk of nonperformance by the tenant justified the large spread between
the lease payments and the riskless Treasury rate. In reality, the responsibility of the U.S.
government for lease payments rendered the quality of the rental stream equivalent to the
U.S. Treasury Note. Rarely do investors face clearer opportunities to buy dollars at a
discount. (Ironically, the opportunity to purchase a risk-free stream of cash flows at a
bargain price came from an agency of the U.S. Government, the Resolution Trust
Corporation (RTC). While the RTC generally did an effective job of disposing of assets,
attractive deals occasionally surfaced.)
The opportunity to purchase real estate assets at bargain basement prices had its seeds
in the excesses of the late 1980s. Real estate was an institutional favorite, topping the list
of attractive categories in asset allocation studies. Investors characterized regional malls as
"irreplaceable assets" with "monopoly positions," purchasing them at cash yields below 5
percent. Downtown office buildings were treated with similar reverence.
In the early 1990s the story changed dramatically. The overbuilding, over-leveraging
and overpaying of the previous decade became apparent as real estate prices went into free
fall. Regional malls, in reverse evolution, became dinosaurs, threatened by competition
from "power centers" and other new retailing concepts. Central business district office
buildings, too, were headed for extinction, as working at home was about to replace
commuting to the city.
Value-oriented investors recognized that circumstances were not as good as they
seemed in the late 1980s and were not as bad as they appeared in the early 1990s. By
simply looking at the relationship between market value and replacement cost, an investor
would be a late 1980s seller and an early 1990s buyer. Buying low and selling high beats
the alternative.
Performance Chasing Behavior
Far from exhibiting the courage required to take contrarian stands, most investors follow
the crowd down the path to comfortable mediocrity. Investor cash flows into and out of
actively managed funds provide a case in point. Ideally, serious investors would provide
funds to managers after a period of understandable underperformance and before a
period of expected outperformance. In fact, investors consistently do the opposite.
Stunning evidence, compiled by Russel Kinnel, Morningstar's Director of Fund
Research, shows remarkably consistent dismal decision making by mutual fund investors.
The Morningstar study, summarized in Table 4.10, compares mutual fund industry
returns that appear in offering documents and advertisements (time-weighted returns)
with mutual fund investor returns that consider cash inflows and outflows (dollar-
weighted returns). The analysis looked at ten years of results, covered all domestic equity
funds and divided them into seventeen categories. In each instance actual experience fell
short of reported results. In other words, investors put money into funds after good
performance (and before bad performance) and took money out of funds after bad
performance (and before good performance).
Kinnel notes that "volatility adds to the problem." Technology funds show a stunning
13.4 percent per annum gap between reported results and actual experience. Sector funds
specializing in communications and health care along with small, mid, and large growth
stock funds round out the list of failure-prone investment vehicles.
Table 4.10 Mutual Fund Investors Consistently Chase Performance
Returns for Ten Years Ending April 30, 2005
Dollar-Weighted Return
Time-Weighted Return
7.7%
8.4
12.5
7.8
8.4
8.8
11.3
12.4
13.6
Category
Technology
Communications
Health
Large growth
Small growth
Mid growth
Small blend
Natural resources
Small value
Real estate
Mid value
-5.7%
3.0
8.5
4.4
5.4
6.3
9.0
10.3
11.6
13.4
10.4
15.4
12.2
Gap
-13.4%
-5.4
-4.0
-3.4
-3.1
-2.5
-2.4
-2.1
-2.0
-2.0
-1.7
< 117-118/433 >
Large Blend
Financials
Moderate allocation
Mid blend
Large value
Conservative allocation
Note: Figures may not add due to rounding
Source: Morningstar Fund Investor. July 2005, Volume 13 Number 11.
7.5
12.8
7.3
10.6
9.6
7.2
9.1
14.4
8.4
11.4
10.0
7.5
-1.6
-1.6
-1.2
-0.8
-0.4
-0.3
While all fund groups show poor investor decision making, less volatile funds produce
less gruesome results. The conservative allocation group boasts the best record, posting
the smallest, but still disappointing gap of 0.3 percent per annum. Other low volatility
offerings in which investors behave relatively well include large value, mid blend, and
moderate allocation.
The Morningstar study indicates that individual investors exhibit return-damaging
performance-chasing behavior with remarkable consistency. Adding the effects of
persistently perverse cash flows to the costs of active management leaves little room for
individual investor success.
Unfortunately, no comparable comprehensive data exist on institutional flows to
active managers. That said, available evidence indicates that institutions suffer from
precisely the same performance-chasing problem as do individuals. Consider the case of
Grantham Mayo Van Otterloo (GMO), an extraordinary Boston-based institutional
money manager. Despite boasting one of the best long-term records in the funds
management business, when the firm hit a rough patch clients deserted in droves.
GMO's rational, valuation-oriented systematic style failed to keep pace with the late
1990s' manic markets. Investors panicked. Between 1998 and 1999 GMO's asset base
declined from $30 billion to $20 billion even as stock markets raced ahead.23 Departing
investors lost thrice: once, by selling GMO at a low point; once, by redeploying assets to
momentum-driven managers destined to fail; and once, by failing to participate in
GMO's recovery. In a stunning indictment of active management, investors intelligent
enough to choose GMO in the first place exhibited the stupidity to abandon the firm's
disciplined approach at the point of maximum opportunity.
Consider the specific story of GMO's quantitatively driven International Intrinsic
Value Strategy. From inception in early 1987 to the end of 2006, the fund produced
returns of 11.1 percent per annum, generating a significant excess return relative to the
EAFE index result of 7.0 percent per annum. Long-term investors in International
Intrinsic Value fared extremely well.
Yet, in the aggregate, investor behavior managed to turn success into failure. Superb
returns in the early 1990s attracted investor interest, as shown in Table 4.11. Average
annual excess returns of 8.7 percent from 1990 to 1993 boosted assets in the strategy from
$378 million to $2.6 billion! As long as trailing three-year performance showed market-
beating returns, inflows continued, increasing assets under management to a peak of $2.8
billion at the end of 1996. Supposedly rational institutions chased GMO's performance.
In 1997, after the trailing three-year performance numbers turned negative, the exodus
began. Client withdrawals took assets in International Intrinsic Value from the 1996 peak
of $2.8 billion to the 2002 low point of $578 million. GMO's poor relative returns from
1994 to 1999 caused fickle clients to abandon a sensible active strategy.
Of course, exiting clients failed to benefit from GMO's dramatic recovery. As
rationality returned to markets after the early 2000 collapse of the Internet bubble, GMO
posted average excess returns of 9.5 percent per annum in the ensuing five years. Buying
high and selling low, as practiced by so many of GMO's clients, produced permanent
damage to portfolios.
Table 4.11 GMO's Institutional Investors Buy High and Sell Low
International Intrinsic Value Strategy
Year Return EAFE
Index
Excess
Return
1990 -8.1% -23.2%
1991
14.4
12.5
1992 -1.1
-11.9
1993 39.9
32.9
1994 4.2
8.1
1995
10.3
11.6
1996
9.6
6.4
1997 0.9
2.1
1998 13.6
20.3
1999 14.6
27.3
2000 -1.4
-14.2
Client Flows (millions of Assets Under Management (millions
dollars)
of dollars)
15.1%
1.9
10.7
7.0
-3.9
-1.2
3.2
-1.1
-6.7
-12.7
12.8
256
503
182
471
(23)
307
85
(1,257)
(784)
(190)
(220)
378
990
1,218
2,595
2,234
2,606
2,838
1,607
1,095
1,057
802
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
-12.1
-0.6
43.5
25.3
14.3
-21.4
-15.9
38.6
20.2
13.5
9.3
15.4
4.9
5.0
0.7
(27)
(7)
1,116
597
886
Source: GMO.
Note: This does not include accounts where GMO has discretion to allocate across multiple strategies.
647
578
1,981
3,162
4,680
Over the period from 1993 to 2003, GMO's International Intrinsic Value Strategy
beat the market by 2.8 percent per year. Client cash flows turned GMO's stellar results on
their head. On a dollar-weighted basis, clients underperformed by 2.0 percent per year.
Poorly considered commitments to and withdrawals from GMO's International Intrinsic
Value Strategy transformed a winning investment vehicle into a losing investment
alternative.
In the closed world of marketable security investing, simple logic dictates that a
majority of assets fail to beat the market, as the impact of management fees and
transaction costs guarantee poor results for most participants. Widespread active
management failure makes the unusual success all the more valuable. When foolish clients
of high quality managers destroy value by responding perversely to past performance, the
already tough case for active management becomes tougher still.
Value investing provides a sturdy foundation for building an investment portfolio, as
the acquisition of assets below fair value provides a margin of safety. In many instances,
value investing proves fundamentally uncomfortable, as the most attractive opportunities
lurk in unattractive or even frightening areas. As a result, many investors abandon sensible
strategies to pursue the fashion du jour. If pursued in a steadfast manner, value strategies
provide a measure of stability to investment programs, reducing dependence on the
vicissitudes of the market and serving to mitigate risks faced by portfolio managers.
CONCLUSION
Investment philosophy defines an investor's approach to generating portfolio returns,
describing in the most fundamental fashion the tenets that permeate the investment
process. Market returns stem from three sources-asset allocation, market timing, and
security selection-with each source of return providing a tool for investors to use to
satisfy institutional goals. Sensible investors employ the available tools in a manner
consistent with a well defined, carefully articulated investment philosophy.
Investor behavior causes policy asset allocation to dominate portfolio returns, since
institutions tend to hold stable commitments to broadly diversified portfolios of
marketable securities. Creating a diversified portfolio with a range of equity-oriented asset
classes that respond to drivers of returns in fundamentally different fashion provides
important underpinning to the investment process.
Market timing causes investors to hold portfolios that differ from policy targets,
jeopardizing a fund's ability to meet long-term objectives. Often driven by fear or greed,
market timing tends to detract from portfolio performance. Many institutions practice an
implicit form of market timing by failing to maintain allocations at long-term policy
targets. Risk control requires regular rebalancing, ensuring that portfolios reflect
institutional preferences.
Active security selection plays a prominent role in nearly all institutional investment
programs despite the poor relative results posted by the overwhelming majority of
investors. Fund managers increase their probability of success by focusing on inefficient
markets that present the greatest range of opportunities. Accepting illiquidity pays
outsized dividends to the patient, long-term investor, while approaching markets with a
value orientation provides a margin of safety. Even if investors execute active management
programs with intelligence and care, efficiency in pricing assets poses a significant
challenge to identifying and implementing market-beating strategies. In the all-too-
frequent situation where investors chase strong returns and abandon weak performance,
the odds of beating the market lengthen dramatically. Reasonable market efficiency and
unreasonable investor behavior combine to make security selection a tough game.
I. Call risk represents the risk that an issuer will redeem bonds at a fixed price prior to maturity. Bondholders
generally suffer when issuers call bonds, since calls usually occur in an environment in which interest rates have
declined.
II. Survivorship bias occurs when data exclude markets (or investment funds or individual securities) that
disappear. Since lower returning, higher-risk markets (or investment funds or individual securities) tend to fail at
a higher rate than their higher-returning, lower-risk counterparts, the sample of survivors describes an
environment that overstates the real world return and understates the real world risk.
III. A phenomenon of the early 1970s, the "Nifty Fifty" consisted of approximately fifty high quality growth
< 121-122/433 >