10
Investment Process
Structuring a portfolio consistent with fundamental investment tenets requires a governance
process that produces an appropriate policy portfolio, avoids counterproductive market
timing, and identifies effective investment management relationships. One of the most critical
portfolio management decisions concerns the choice between (a) developing an organization
with the capability of selecting high quality active managers, and (b) deploying a strategy with
an emphasis on bare bones passive vehicles. While choosing an active approach broadens the
asset class opportunity set and holds the promise of market-beating returns, active strategies
demand a significant commitment of resources. Those institutions that engage in active
management without proper support face the unpalatable prospect of generating
disappointing results for themselves and creating opportunities for better prepared investors.
Two important tencts of investment management-contrarian thinking and long-term
orientation-pose challenges for governance of endowment funds. Because large bureaucratic
organizations invariably use groups of people (investment committees) to oversee other groups
of people (investment staff), consensus-building behavior permeates the investment process.
Unless carefully managed, group dynamics frequently thwart contrarian activities and impose
shorter than optimal time horizons. Creating a governance process that encourages long-term,
independent, contrarian thinking represents a critical undertaking for endowed institutions.
John Maynard Keynes, in The General Theory, describes the difficulties inherent in group
investment decision making: "Finally it is the long-term investor, he who most promotes the
public interest, who will in practice come in for most criticism, wherever investment funds are
managed by committees or boards or banks. For it is the essence of his behavior that he should
be eccentric, unconventional, and rash in the eyes of average opinion. If he is successful, that
will only confirm the general belief in his rashness; and if in the short run he is unsuccessful,
which is very likely, he will not receive much mercy. Worldly wisdom teaches that it is better for
reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally." The challenges facing an
institution attempting to structure effective governance processes center on exercising
appropriate fiduciary oversight, while encouraging "eccentric, unconventional, and rash"
behavior.
ACTIVE versus PASSIVE MANAGEMENT
Perhaps, the most important distinguishing characteristic of an investor concerns the ability
(or lack thereof) to make high quality active management decisions. Skillful active investors
sensibly employ a broader set of asset class alternatives, enriching opportunities for portfolio
diversification. Adept active investors pursue market-beating strategies in marketable securities,
potentially enhancing asset class returns. The active investor enjoys the greatest opportunity to
create and implement portfolios with high potential returns and low prospective risks.
The surest path to making effective active management decisions comes from engaging a
highly qualified staff of professionals committed to serving the interests of the investment
fund. A dedicated staff supplies the resources necessary to identify the exceedingly rare group
of managers able to add value in the investment process. In addition, hiring a group of
individuals to manage a particular investment fund reduces the severity of the principal-agent
conflicts that pervade the money management industry, as the staff serves as a strong advocate
for the institution's interests.
Investors without the resources to make well-informed active management judgments
sensibly limit portfolio choices to passively managed, broad-based asset classes of marketable
securities, including domestic equity, foreign developed equity, emerging market equity, real
estate investment trusts, U.S. Treasury bonds and U.S. Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities.
The intensely competitive investment world inevitably punishes casual attempts to beat the
market, leading the rational resource-constrained investor to employ a manageable set of low-
cost passive alternatives.
Certain asset classes require active management skills if the investor hopes to realize an
attractive risk-adjusted outcome: absolute return, real assets, and private equity. In each case,
no market exists for the investor to buy; active management proves critical to producing
acceptable results. In each case, fee arrangements-the combination of an asset-based
management fee and a profits interest-create a substantial hurdle for investment success and
provide dramatic punishment for investors who fail. In cach case, in large part because of the
generous fee arrangements, median asset class returns fail to provide satisfactory risk-adjusted
returns to providers of capital. In each case, identifying managers with substantial potential
involves a broad range of qualitative and quantitative skills. Success in absolute return, real
assets, and private equity depends critically on high quality active management decisions.
Aside from allowing investors to effectively use a broader set of asset classes, a high quality
team of professionals enables an institution to seek market-beating results in the relatively
efficiently priced marketable securities arena. Even though low cost, passive alternatives provide
a high hurdle for active managers, with diligent investigation and a sufficiently long time
horizon, top-notch investment professionals face reasonable prospects of producing superior
active management records.
The role of active management takes center stage in deliberations regarding the structure of
the investment organization and governance of the investment process. Institutions that create
well-staffed, high quaility investment organizations with effective committee oversight enjoy
the opportunity to employ a broader range of asset classes and exploit an intriguing set of
market inefficiencies. Institutions without substantial staff resources sensibly follow a strategy
limited to passively managed portfolios. The choice between the active and the passive
approaches to portfolio management carries implications for nearly every aspect of the
investment process.
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
To produce a high quaility, actively managed portfolio, investment management organizations
require a strong staff overseen by a well-functioning investment committee. Effective
investment committees provide appropriate oversight while taking care not to impinge on staff
responsibilities. Limiting committee meetings to four per year prevents trustees from becoming
too involved in day-to-day portfolio management decisions, yet allows staff to receive
appropriate guidance from the committee. By presuming that initiatives come from staff, not
from committee members, responsibility for the nature and direction of the investment
program rests squarely on the shoulders of the investment office. In short, the investment
committee should play the role of a board of directors for the fund management operation.
Investment Committee
A strong investment committee brings discipline to the endowment management process. By
thoroughly and thoughtfully vetting investment recommendations, the committee inspires
staff to produce ever more carefully considered proposals. Ideally, committees rarely exercise
the power to reject staff recommendations. If a committee frequently turns down or revises
investment proposals, the staff encounters difficulty in managing the portfolio. Investment
opportunities often require negotiation of commitments subject to board approval. If the
board withholds approval with any degree of regularity, staff loses credibility in the eyes of the
investment management community. That said, the committee must provide more than a
rubber stamp for staff recommendations. In a well run organization, committee discussion of
investment proposals influences the direction and nature of future staff initiatives. Effective
portfolio management requires striking a balance between respect for the ultimate authority of
the investment committee and delegation of reasonable responsibility to the investment staff.
Committee members often provide assistance between meetings, providing feedback on
past actions and suggesting strategies for the future. Informed give and take elevates the
investment dialog, challenging staff and committee to improve the quality of investment
decision making.
Investment committee members should be selected primarily for good judgment. While no
particular background qualifics an individual to serve on the committee, broad understanding
of financial markets proves useful in overseeing the investment process. Aggregating a
collection of investment specialists occasionally poses dangers, particularly when committee
members attempt to manage the portfolio, not the process. Successful executives bring a
valuable perspective to the table provided they suspend their natural inclination to reward
success and punish failure. The sometimes deep rooted corporate instinct to pursue winners
and avoid losers pushes portfolios toward fundamentally risky momentum-driven strategies
and away from potentially profitable contrarian opportunities. The most effective investment
committee members understand the responsibility to oversee the investment process and to
provide support for the investment staff, while avoiding actual management of the portfolio.
Investment Staff
Strong investment staffs drive the portfolio management process. Whether dealing with broad
issues of asset allocation and spending policy or specific issues of portfolio management and
manager selection, the staff needs to make a rigorous, compelling case for adopting a particular
course of action. Advocacy must not compromise disclosure, as actual and potential
weaknesses need to be fully described and discussed. Intellectual dishonesty ultimately proves
fatal to the investment process.
Without a disciplined process for articulating investment recommendations, decision
making tends to become informal, even casual. In the case of asset allocation decisions, effective
staff analysis establishes and articulates a coherent, intellectual framework from which well-
grounded recommendations flow. In the case of individual manager decisions, a rigorous
evaluation of all aspects of the investment opportunity, including thorough due diligence on
the quality of the investment principals, serves as an essential precondition to committing
investment funds.
Written recommendations provide a particularly useful means of communicating
investment ideas. The process of drafting memos often exposes logical flaws or gaps in
knowledge. Awareness that a critical audience of colleagues and committee members will
review investment memos stimulates careful, logical exposition of proposals. Comprehensive
written treatments of investment issues provide a common background for staff and
committee members, supporting high quality discussion at meetings.
Better decisions come from small internal decision-making groups consisting of no more
than three or four people. As the number of people involved in a decision increases, the
likelihood of a conventional, compromising consensus increases. Obviously, with a large staff,
the same small group of people need not make all decisions. For example, different groups
might make recommendations for different asset classes, preserving the principle of small
group decision making while allowing organizations to engage the staff resources necessary to
deal with growing portfolio complexity and increasing asset levels.
Investment organizations benefit from the constant renewal provided by the addition of
young professionals. Their energy, enthusiasm, and fresh perspective prevent dry rot from
taking hold. The apprenticeship training process benefits both the trained and the trainer, as
the process of teaching benefits both the student and the teacher. As Yale economist James
Tobin observed, "I never fail to learn, from the students themselves and from the discipline of
presenting ideas clearly to them." In a well-structured organization, new hires make an early
impact. Pushing responsibility down in an organization improves performance and enhances
satisfaction.
Organizational Characteristics
Strong investment management groups share a number of characteristics, with great people
constituting the single most important element. In October 1987, Treasury Secretary Henry
Paulson, then a senior executive at Goldman Sachs, speaking at Yale's School of Management,
articulated a compelling case that high quality individuals gravitate toward entities that operate
on the cutting edge, that embrace a global strategy, that provide opportunities to benefit from
focused mentorship, and that encourage early acceptance of significant responsibility.
Organizations on the cutting edge choose from a broader opportunity set. By examining
nontraditional asset allocations, investors improve the chances of finding a portfolio mix well-
suited to the institution's needs. By considering alternatives outside of the mainstream,
investors increase the likelihood of discovering the next big winner well before it becomes the
next big bust. By evaluating managers without the requisite check-the-box institutional
characteristics, investors boost the odds of uncovering a highly motivated, attractive group of
partners. Operating on the periphery of standard institutional norms increases opportunity for
success.
A global perspective facilitates understanding of investment alternatives, providing valuable
context for consideration of even the most parochial domestic opportunity. Aside from
improving an investor's decision-making framework, global reach increases the scope of
investment choices, enhancing the possibility of identifying superior options. Obviously, along
with the expanded range of possibilities comes the increased potential for failure. Overseas
commitments entail inherently higher levels of risk as availability of information and depth of
understanding almost invariably compare unfavorably to knowledge of domestic market
alternatives.
Focused mentorship provides essential training for new staff as individuals assimilate
investment management principles primarily through experience. While academic training
provides a necessary foundation, aspiring investors learn best through serving an
apprenticeship, benefiting from day-to-day exposure to the thoughts and actions of
experienced colleagues.
Giving Junior members of the team early responsibility challenges all members of an
investment organization to spread critical skills throughout the group. Transmitting key
principles to younger colleagues magnifies the impact of more senior players, broadening the
scope of an organization's reach and the range of its accomplishments. As a corollary benefit,
the training process reinforces and freshens the commitment of all participants to the group's
core investment beliefs.
While both organizations and individuals benefit from Paulson's paradigm of a cutting
edge, globally oriented institution that provides focused mentorship and early responsibility,
successful investment organizations require an additional dimension. Most operations thrive
by taking a conventional, middle-of-the-road approach to management. Success in investment
management requires an unconventional, out-of-the-mainstream understanding of markets.
Independent thinking contributes to strong investment decision making. Large,
bureaucratic plan sponsors provide an example of counterproductive practices where standard
investment manager search techniques exclude nearly all interesting managers from
consideration. By circulating "requests for proposals" that require vast quantities of detailed
information to complete, the bureaucrats encourage the wrong sort of manager to apply. The
seemingly endless questionnaires-that include criteria for minimum historical performance
levels, asset size, and years of experience-ensure conventionally unimaginative and ultimately
unsuccessful management. While the bureaucratic process practically guarantees poor results,
the bureaucrat's job proves secure, as massive stacks of paper protect every investment decision.
Bureaucracies lack the imagination and courage to pursuc nonconventional paths that prove
essential to building a successful investment program.
Self awareness plays a critical role in investment analysis. Understanding and exploiting
strengths makes an obvious contribution to performance. Recognizing and dealing effectively
with weaknesses represents a less obvious factor. Ruthlessly honest evaluation of absolute and
comparative advantages and disadvantages increases the likelihood of backing winners and
avoiding losers.
Frank, open discussions of failures and successes provide essential feedback for improved
decision making. By understanding failures, investors create the opportunity to avoid making
the same mistake in the future. Analysis of winners provides keys for unlocking future
successes. In contrast, assigning blame engenders an atmosphere that discourages risk taking.
impairing the investment process in a fundamental fashion. Stated differently, successful
investment cultures encourage professionals to find new mistakes to make, instead of simply
repeating old errors.
Providing an environment with low costs of failure encourages experimentation, allowing
investors to take well-considered, intelligent risks knowing that losses do not threaten careers.
The type of unconventional behavior necessary for meaningful investment success produces its
share of shortcomings.
Consider the record of the Yale investments team responsible for the university's stellar
record over the past two decades. In every instance where Yale launched a major investment
initiative (e.g., absolute return, real estate, timber, oil and gas, buyouts, venture capital,
international private equity, active domestic equity, and active foreign equity), the crack
investment team initially backed a manager that failed to stand the test of time. Yet, in every
instance, the initiatives (implemented by an improved set of managers) contributed
enormously to Yale's investment success. Encouraging experimentation and tolerating failure
represent necessary preconditions for developing winning strategies.
Collegiality plays a critical role in creating and sustaining an appropriate investment
environment. Supportive co-workers lessen the lonely contrarian's feelings of vulnerability that
stem from the frequent failures that mark even the most successful investment programs.
Understanding colleagues take some of the sting out of mistakes, facilitating continued pursuit
of risky investment opportunities.
Successful investors operate outside of the mainstream. In institutional settings which prize
conformity, pursuit of potentially rewarding investment opportunities requires strong
intellectual leadership. Without strong leadership, investment management decisions fail to rise
above normal bureaucratic standards and produce predictably mediocre results. By establishing
a decision-making framework that encourages unconventional, controversial actions, an
effective leader provides the foundation for a successful investment program.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
The nature of the not-for-profit investment governance process has changed dramatically over
time. Decades ago, trustees generally chose individual securities at regularly scheduled quarterly
meetings. Simple portfolios contained relatively few positions, allowing full review in a period
of several hours. Finance committees populated by "titans of industry frequently contributed
direct, useful knowledge regarding individual security holdings.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the standard portfolio management structure involved a handful of
external managers who typically pursued balanced mandates and placed modest demand on
fiduciaries. Governance issues remained similar to those confronting trustees managing
portfolios "out of their back pockets." Instead of monitoring dozens of individual securities,
investment committee members tracked and evaluated a limited group of outside managers.
Because the managers invested largely in familiar securities and home markets, the process
proved comfortable for trustees and staff alike.
In recent decades, demands placed on investment staff and trustees have multiplied along
with the increase in the number of institutional asset classes and the corresponding explosion
in the number of specialty investment managers. Even as trustees deal with the greater
complexity of the investment world, they have encountered dramatic increases in the breadth
and seriousness of issues facing nonprofit institutions. As a consequence, many institutions
have devoted adequate time and attention to investment management.
The structure of investment organizations often failed to keep pace with changes in the
external world. In many cases, institutions remained rooted in the past, devoting insufficient
resources to financial asset management. Endowment management suffered in the not
uncommon circumstance where the treasurer spent only a fraction of the work week
supervising hundreds of millions of dollars. Failing to provide adequate staff support falls in
the category of penny wise and pound foolish. For every additional one percent per annum
added to investment returns, a half billion dollar endowment generates an incremental five
million dollars annually. The costs of a high quality investment organization pale in
comparison to the value of improved results.
Attracting and compensating qualified investment professionals poses challenges for
nonprofit institutions. In the private sector, financial services professionals carn staggering
amounts of money. In contrast, as is the case for most employees in not-for-profits, nonprofit
investment professionals carn substantially less than their for-profit counterparts. The
combination of a below market nonprofit pay scale and extraordinary private sector
compensation creates potential for divisive tension regarding compensation issues in the
nonprofit community.
Separate Management Companies
To deal with compensation issues, a number of universities established distinct management
companies to invest endowment assets. The fundamental problem with this organizational
(and in some cases, physical) separation concerns the tendency to treat the management
company solely as an investment entity. Proper stewardship of endowment assets requires
consideration of both spending and investment policies, with particular attention to the ways
in which they interact. The job is not likely to be well done if the management company takes
responsibility for investment decisions while others determine spending policies.
In fact, stewardship of endowment assets improves when the investment operation becomes
part of the fabric of the institution. The greater the degree of professional interaction between
endowment managers and the rest of the educational enterprise, the more credibility
investment professionals have in discussing and recommending spending policies. At
universities, common avenues of interaction include teaching by investment staff, sccking
portfolio advice from faculty, working with development office staff, and contributing to the
analysis of noninvestment financial issues. Aside from enhancing the overall contribution of
the investment operation to the wider organization, interacting with other parts of the
institution increases professional fulfillment for investment staff.
Ironically, establishing separate investment management companies to facilitate increased
compensation for professionals sometimes exacerbates the problem. Greater separation leads to
less identification with the institution, reducing the psychic income garnered from supporting
the not-for-profit's cleemosynary mission. Psychic income foregone must be replaced with hard
cash, further straining the bond between the management company and the rest of the
institution.
Stanford Management Company
The 2006 travails of Stanford Management Company illustrate in high relief the issues
surrounding compensation of investment professionals in an academic institution. In the
1990s, Stanford established its endowment management operation as an organization both
physically and psychologically separate from the campus. The investment team occupied some
of the most expensive real estate in the world on Sand Hill Road adjacent to the offices of
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. For most of the 1990s, Lauric Hoagland ably led the
Stanford investment operation which produced consistently superior results. Mike McCaffrey,
former chief executive of investment bank Robertson Stephens, took over the management of
Stanford's portfolio in September 2000, building on Hoagland's base and running the
portfolio effectively in the difficult period following the collapse of the Internet bubble in
March 2000.
Yet, McCaffrey found it difficult to deal with the compensation constraints of the not-for-
profit world. He found that his employees faced a constant barrage of offers from the private
sector. Frustrated by staff turnover, he sought a means to increase his staff's compensation in
order to improve retention. He hit upon the idea of using Stanford Management Company to
manage external assets which would provide a revenue stream he could use to enhance his
colleagues' pay.
McCaffrey structured a proposal for the Stanford board. The plan made substantial
progress, gathering initial support from the trustees and indications of interest from both
individual and institutional investors. At the eleventh hour, however, McCaffrey decided not
to move forward based on an insufficient level of enthusiasm from Stanford.
Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, was one of the interested parties who hoped to invest a
portion of his considerable wealth with the Stanford team. Undeterred by Stanford's lack of
enthusiasm, McCaffrey and Allen formed a new venture, Makena Capital, to pursue the asset
management business as an independent entity. Two senior Stanford Management
professionals joined McCaffrey at Makena, gutting the leadership ranks of the university's
investment organization. Makena raised $7 billion in short order, including $1.5 billion from
Paul Allen, a stunning accomplishment for a start-up organization.
Among the troubling issues raised by the departure of Stanford's senior investment team,
the most important issue concerns organizational culture. By operating less like a not-for-profit
and more like an investment bank where pay matters above all else, Stanford Management
failed to select employees who identified with Stanford's institutional mission. Instead of
finding individuals who wished to carn handsome compensation and support one of the
world's great educational institutions, Stanford attracted investment professionals who were in
it for the money. Inevitably, the not-for-profit pay discount led to high turnover among those
who wanted Wall Street compensation.
A stable, cohesive team brings enormous strengths to the investment process. Aside from
the obvious benefits of continuity to portfolio management, investment professionals who
identify with the organization's mission and who become part of the fabric of the place
ultimately serve institutional needs in a superior fashion. Stanford Management Company's
failure to create a culture consistent with the university's mission ultimately imposed
significant costs on one of the world's great educational institutions.
Institutions need not establish separate investment companies to address compensation
issues. Exceptions to standard policies can be made to pay reasonably competitive salaries,
including the use of incentive-based compensation, without the radical break implied by
creation of a separate legal entity. Dealing with the trade-offs within the context of the
university, while difficult, lessens the magnitude of the problems associated with complete
separation of the investment management organization.
While the desire to create separate compensation schemes for university investment
professionals appears to drive the establishment of separate management companies, hopes for
improved governance may also contribute to the decision. As the breadth and complexity of
investment alternatives increase, so do the demands on trustees responsible for overseeing
investment operations. Establishing an independent management company allows the
institution to look beyond the existing group of trustees when selecting fiduciaries to oversee
endowment assets.
Yet governance issues can be addressed without creating a separate management company.
Since its establishment in 1975, Yale's Investment Committee included nontrustee advisors to
assist in governance. The use of outside advisors, who bring valuable insight and perspective to
the process, obviates the need to establish a separate investment company to draw from a
broader pool of governance talent. As an added bonus, service by outside advisors on the
investment committee gives an institution the opportunity to get a close look at an interesting
group of institutional supporters. In fact, at Yale, a number of investment committee members
have gone on to serve on the university's governing board.
Establishing appropriate governance and compensation structures for endowment
management organizations poses a difficult set of issues as radical differences between private
sector and nonprofit compensation levels create inevitable tensions. While establishing distinct
subsidiaries to manage endowment funds addresses oversight and pay issues, the accompanying
physical and psychological separation imposes significant costs on the broader organization.
Addressing compensation and governance concerns within the context of the entire institution
provides a solution more likely to produce results consistent with the organization's needs.
USE OF INTERMEDIARIES
In an effort to pursue an active management program without committing the required time,
energy, and resources, many institutions take the shortcut of using a fund of funds or a
consultant. Unfortunately, the use of external agents (instead of an internal investment team)
leads down a path to suboptimal results, as the interests of the fund of funds manager or
investment consultant inevitably diverge from the interests of the institutional investor.
Deep understanding of markets based on meaningful interaction between fiduciaries and
external managers provides the strongest foundation for investment success. Employing a fund
of funds manager or engaging a consultant places a filter between those entrusted with
responsibility for the assets and those making investment decisions. Without the confidence
engendered by thorough, direct understanding of manager actions and market opportunities,
investors Judge competence of external agents primarily by the performance numbers, which
constitute an insufficient, unreliable, and sometimes perverse measure. Risks associated with
distancing fiduciaries from investment managers dictate that fund of funds and consultancy
arrangements receive skeptical scrutiny.
Fund of Funds
Fund of funds managers provide the service of making investment decisions for fiduciaries. By
pooling assets, usually from less sophisticated investors, fund of funds managers argue that
economies of scale allow professional staff to manage monies in institutional fashion. Fund of
funds firms range from multiproduct concerns that provide one-stop shopping to entities
focused on specific niches, including nearly every asset class imaginable.
By providing manager selection and monitoring services, broad-based funds of funds
suggest that they enable smaller organizations to tap into otherwise unavailable sophisticated
investment strategies. Larger organizations sometimes hope to benefit by employing funds of
funds to gain exposure to unfamiliar market niches.
In spite of the purported benefits from employing fund of funds managers, substantial risks
stem from imposing a filter between the investment manager and the ultimate client.
Regardless of the level of disclosure provided by the fund of funds manager, transparency in
the investment management relationship declines dramatically. Clients unable or unwilling to
understand the underlying manager characteristics rely solely on performance to evaluate
investment strategies. When results disappoint, clients wonder not only about the investment
managers, but also about the competence of the fund of funds advisor.
Faced with poor performance, the client loses the benefits associated with delegating
responsibility to the fund of funds manager. Understanding the source of poor results requires
investigation of the underlying investment management organizations, a task that the fiduciary
hoped to avoid. Short of a thorough underwriting of the constituent managers, clients have no
alternative other than simply reacting to the numbers, exposing the portfolio to the damaging
prospect of selling low after having bought high.
When employing fund of funds managers, investors must search for firms with compatible
professional and ethical standards. Delegating authority to engage investment managers carries
enormous import. Even large, reputable fund of funds managers occasionally make
staggeringly inappropriate judgments. Several years ago, a private equity vehicle launched by a
multibillion-dollar fund of funds considered engaging an individual to manage an oil and gas
program. Aside from the fact that the individual's resume showed little direct relevant
experience, a criminal history clouded his past. Convicted of drug dealing, the purported
energy manager had also been arrested and convicted for spousal abuse.
Most investors, when confronted with this set of facts, move on to the next opportunity.
Under the best of circumstances, investing poses significant challenges. Hiring an
inexperienced partner with a criminal past increases the difficulties immeasurably.
What motivated the staff to propose backing a poorly qualified manager of dubious
character? While the full story likely contains a complex set of reasons, one obvious answer
stands out. Fund of funds managers justify their existence in part by making nonstandard
choices. Investing in the usual suspects provides less value added than does identifying
emerging managers unavailable to most market participants.
Ultimately, the fund of funds decided to put the former drug dealer in the energy
investment business. Not content simply to back this individual in the firm's standard format
as one of a number of managers in a pool, the organization decided to devote the entire energy
fund to this single manager. Life is too short to waste time making a concentrated bet on an
individual with a checkered past, when the world provides countless superior alternatives.
In another extraordinary incident, Paloma Partners, a multibillion-dollar fund of funds,
engaged John Mulheren's Buffalo Partners to manage a risk arbitrage portfolio. Mulheren
gained notoriety in February 1988, when he packed his trunk with a.233 caliber Israeli Galil
assault rifle, 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol, .357 Magnum pistol, 12-gauge pistol-grip
shotgun, and three hundred rounds of ammunition, intending to shoot Ivan Boesky. Alerted
by Mulheren's wife, State of New Jersey troopers arrested Mulheren, preventing a possible
tragedy.2
Since Paloma Partners refuses to disclose names of underlying investment managers, even to
clients, most of the firm's investors were unaware of the relationship. Upon learning of the
involvement with Mulheren, a potential client challenged the fund manager, arguing the
investment did not meet institutional standards. "Mulheren's a great investor when he's taking
his lithium," replied the manager.
Adding a layer to the investment management process decreases transparency, posing
serious problems for fiduciaries. Instead of relying on someone's judgment in making
investment decisions, the fiduciary relies on someone's judgment about someone's judgment in
making the ultimate decisions. While commitments to convicted drug dealers and would-be
assassins represent extreme examples of poor judgment, the incidents highlight the risk of using
intermediaries to make decisions. The greater the number of layers, the greater the likelihood
that outcomes deviate from the fiduciary's preferences.
Aside from the issues of transparency and delegation of authority, fund of funds suffer from
burdensome fee structures. In the world of active management, the majority of assets fail to
produce risk-adjusted excess returns as the certainty of manager fees and transaction costs
overwhelm the false promise of investment success. Stated simply, the fund of funds manager
adds another layer of fees to already debilitating charges, further diminishing the chances of
realizing market-beating returns.
On top of the additional fee burden, the fund of funds faces the challenge of adverse
selection, which limits the available opportunity set. Investment managers vastly prefer direct
relationships with providers of capital. Funds of funds represent an inflexible and unreliable
source of funding, because they do not control directly the monies they employ to make
commitments. Since the highest quality investment managers enjoy the greatest ability to pick
and choose their investor base, the fund of funds fights an uphill battle in accessing top notch
investment firms.
Discrimination against funds of funds usually proceeds quietly, since prudent managers
guard against the day when they might need to tap fund of funds' money, however unreliable it
might be. Taking a rare public stand, in 2006, world class venture capital firm Sequoia Capital
eliminated all funds of funds from its investor ranks.3 By stating publicly what many managers
practice privately, Sequoia Capital highlighted the problem of adverse selection.
Some evidence for the underperformance of funds of funds comes from the 2006
NACUBO Endowment Study. Large endowments (with assets greater than $1 billion)
reported hedge fund returns of 11.0 percent for the year ending June 30, 2006. Small
endowments (with assets between $25 million and $50 million) posted hedge fund returns of
8.2 percent. What accounts for the difference? Funds of funds likely contributed to the
relatively poor performance of smaller endowments. According to the study, only 2.7 percent
of large endowments used funds of funds, while 47 percent of small endowments employed
funds of funds. Apparently, a relationship exists between the use of funds of funds and
substandard returns.
Further evidence on the poor returns generated by funds of funds comes from a study by
Josh Lerner of Harvard, Antoinette Schoar of MIT, and Wan Wong of Harvard. In Smart
Institutions, Foolish Choices?: The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle, the authors examine
investment returns for private equity funds selected by various categories of investors. Returns
on funds chosen by endowments produced "by far the best overall performance" with an
average internal rate of return (IRR) of 20 percent. Funds of funds failed miserably, selecting
partnerships with an average IRR of negative two percent.5 The academic research backs up
the a priori intuition. Investors sensibly avoid funds of funds based on issues of transparency,
judgment, fees, and adverse selection.
Consulting Firms
Seeking to supplement internal resources, many institutions engage consulting firms to
contribute to the investment process. The notion of employing qualified external resources
strikes many fiduciaries as a sensible means to deal with the complexities of portfolio
management. Unfortunately, the dynamics of the consulting business frequently drive clients
to suboptimal outcomes.
Consulting firms maximize profits by providing identical advice to as many clients as
possible. In the investment world, which demands portfolios custom tailored to institution-
specific risk and return preferences, a cookie cutter approach fails. Clients must either identify
a consulting firm that cares about goals other than profit maximization or manage the
consulting relationship to achieve appropriately tailored advice.
Consultants express conventional views and make safe recommendations. Because
consultants rarely espouse unconventional points of view, they provide more than adequate
cover when dealing with investment committees. Decision makers rest comfortably, knowing
that a recognized consulting firm blessed the chosen investment strategy.
Selecting managers from the consultant's internally approved recommended list serves as a
poor starting point for identifying managers likely to provide strong future results. No
consultant who wishes to stay employed recommends a start-up manager with all of the
attendant organizational and investment risks. Because consultants seek to spread the costs of
identifying and monitoring managers, consultants recommend established managers that have
the capacity (if not the ability) to manage large pools of assets. Clients end up with bloated, fee-
driven investment management businesses instead of nimble return-oriented entrepreneurial
firms.
Unfortunately, the economics of consulting drive an unusual wedge between the interests
of the consultant and the interests of the client. Ongoing demand for consulting services
requires that clients remain dependent on the consultant, reducing incentives for consultants
to move clients toward self-sufficiency. In extreme cases consultants recommend programs that,
while ostensibly in the client's interests, simply serve to assure a continued stream of income
for the consultant. For example, private equity consultants, also known as "gatekeepers,"
sometimes recommend direct co-investment programs to clients, which are obviously ill-
equipped to handle the program. (The client cannot even make a partnership decision without
assistance; how could the client make an even more difficult direct investment decision?) Along
with the co-investment recommendation, gatekeepers offer selection and monitoring services.
If successful, the gatekeeper locks in a combination of partnership selection, co-investment
advice, and monitoring services, creating an annuity stream lasting the life of the investment
program.
In an even more troubling development, many consulting firms now offer fund of funds
investment management services. The entire concept rests on an irreconcilable conflict of
interest in which the purportedly objective consultant recommends that the client hire the
consultant to manage assets. The combination of a self-interested consulting firm and the
structurally flawed fund of funds business leads to an ugly proposition for the investment
management client.
A former consultant summarizes the problems of the consulting industry in the following
polemic:
Ninety-five percent of institutions rely on a consultant to come in once a year, do a
manager search that costs $18,000 conducted by someone with four years of industry
experience, select a manager who is gathering assets, has good three-year performance
numbers (how many times have you seen a consultant or committee pick a manager with
poor three-year performance?) and has standard management fees. This scenario is
repeated daily in the endowment and foundation world. The same institutions will fire
the manager, who they barely know through their once a year client service presentation,
when they underperform for two years.
Consultants, for business reasons, cannot spend a lot of time on managers who will
keep their asset base small. The economics of scale are not there. If there is a great
manager who may have $50 million or $100 million of capacity per year, a consultant
cannot cover them in detail. It just does not scale. Therefore, consultants are geared
toward large managers with standard management fees that have lots of capacity going
forward.
Interposing consultants between fund fiduciaries and external managers creates a range of
problems that stem from a disconnect between the consulting firm's profit motive and the
client's investment objectives. While consulting firms offer a shortcut that avoids the hard work
of creating a dedicated investment operation, as is the case with many shortcuts, the end results
disappoint.
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS
Reasonable decision-making processes give appropriate emphasis to the range of issues facing
committee and staff. Charley Ellis describes a useful framework for categorizing various
portfolio management decisions. Policy decisions concern long-term issues that inform the
basic structural framework of the investment process. Strategic decisions represent
intermediate-term moves designed to adapt longer term policies to immediate market
opportunities and institutional realities. Trading and tactical decisions involve short-term
implementation of strategies and policies.
In his wonderful book, Winning the Loser's Game, Ellis bemoans the fact that decision
makers spend too much time on relatively exciting trading and tactical decisions at the expense
of the more powerful, yet more mundane, policy decisions. A decision-making process
centered on making high quality policy decisions increases an investor's chances of winning.
Policy Target Focus
Policy asset allocation targets represent the heart of the investment process. No other aspect of
portfolio management plays as great a role in determining a fund's ultimate performance. No
other statement says as much about the character of a fund. Establishing a governance
framework focused on policy decisions constitutes the most fundamental obligation of
investment fiduciarics. Without a disciplined, rigorous process for setting asset allocation
targets, effective portfolio management becomes impossible.
A robust discussion of asset allocation targets requires careful preparation. At the meeting
prior to the annual review, staff members present to the committee a brief description of the
issues they intend to analyze. The chair of the committee should encourage members to offer
suggestions for issues that the investment staff could then consider along with the internally
generated topics. A well-structured process underpins careful decision making.
Asset allocation targets ought to be reviewed once (and only once) per year. By
concentrating the discussion of investment policy in one meeting, the most important
investment decisions receive concentrated attention from both staff and committee. Perhaps
equally important, limiting policy discussions to the assigned meeting diminishes the
possibility of damage from ill-considered moves made in emotional response to the waves of
gloom or cuphoria that sweep over markets from time to time.
Yale and the 1987 Market Crash
The October 1987 crash in stock prices placed stresses and strains on decision-making
processes. Yale felt the pressure. In spite of the fact that the university had followed a quarterly
meeting schedule since the investment committee was established in 1975, two extraordinary
meetings were held in late 1987 and early 1988 in response to the crash. Even though at the
time of the meetings stock prices were substantially lower and bond prices measurably higher
than at the time of the June 1987 policy review, the committee discussed whether to increase
the policy allocation to bonds at the expense of stocks.
Yale made a disciplined late October, post-crash rebalancing purchase of tens of millions of
dollars of equities funded by a corresponding sale of tens of millions of dollars of bonds. In the
context of the gloom of late 1987, Yale's action appeared rash. Other institutions not only
allowed equity positions to drift downward by the amount of the relative stock market decline,
they further reduced equity exposure through net sales in November and December. Such sales
seemed prudent in an environment where the New York Times published a weekly chart that
superimposed 1987 stock prices on a chart of prices for 1929 through 1932.
Yale's internal committee dynamics proved difficult. In a written memorandum, one
member characterized Yale's asset allocation as "super aggressive" and on the "far edge of
aggressiveness. Citing bleak short-term prospects for equities, he commented that if Yale were
right to have an aggressive equity posture, the university will get "little credit," but if Yale were
wrong there would be "all hell to pay." Believing that "events of the past six months have
diminished long-term prospects for equity markets," the committee member concluded that
the university's assumptions regarding expected returns were overly optimistic. Hence, he
suggested that both short-term and long-term considerations required downward adjustment
of Yale's equity target. Another, more analytically inclined member, wondered if increases in
historical volatility made stocks less attractive on a relative basis.7 By questioning assumptions
that had been examined as part of the annual policy review only four months earlier,
committee members exposed Yale to the risk of an untimely reversal of strategy.
After much Sturm und Drang, Yale maintained policy targets, reaping attractive returns on
its post-crash rebalancing trade. In spite of the university's success, behind-the-scenes
discussions illustrate the potential danger of revisiting policy target levels too frequently,
particularly in the midst of a market crisis. While trauma surrounding the 1987 stock market
crash caused the university to violate past practice of limiting policy allocation discussions to
one meeting per year, disciplined implementation of a sensible policy ultimately contributed to
the pursuit of effective strategies in a difficult environment.
Although in retrospect the committee's actions appear innocuous, in other states of the
world the positions taken by the investment committee members could have had severe
repercussions for Yale's investment staff. In particular, the extraordinary memo containing a
committee member's ex post facto criticism of the policy allocation targets had dangerous
overtones. Had the market not recovered within a relatively short time frame, those staff
members closely identified with the rebalancing trade might have suffered serious damage to
their carcers.
Strategic and Tactical Issues
While the committee meeting on policy asset allocation represents the focal point of the
investment process, other meetings deal with important strategic issues. Following the close of
the fiscal year, a meeting devoted to portfolio evaluation discusses the character and
performance of the overall endowment and individual asset classes. Portfolio review
memoranda describe individual asset classes in depth, placing results in the context of market
conditions and identifying factors that influence significant investment opportunities. The
positioning of an asset class relative to its benchmark with respect to fundamental
characteristics such as size, sector, and style-highlights significant portfolio bets that are
evaluated retrospectively and prospectively. Active management efforts receive grades in the
form of detailed report cards for each manager. The individual manager assessments include
not only performance data, but information on reporting, transparency, fee structures, and co-
investment. Analysis of strengths and weaknesses of portfolio strategies leads to an outline for
future projects to improve portfolio management. In essence, the portfolio evaluation meeting
provides a backward-looking assessment and a forward-looking strategic plan.
The remaining two quarterly meetings generally have a topical focus, frequently involving
in-depth analysis of a specific asset class. Meetings centered on individual asset classes drill deep
to provide a granular view, allowing committee and staff to evaluate thoroughly every aspect of
asset class management. Decision-making assessments consider the impact of bets regarding
size, sector, and style. One particularly effective exercise goes well beyond traditional
performance evaluation by examining returns of terminated managers. In assessing
performance of fired managers relative to benchmarks and actual portfolio results, investigators
gain insight into the effectiveness of termination moves, a topic often comfortably ignored
after completing the difficult task of severing ties.
Asset class reviews provide a chance for external investment managers to engage investment
committee and staff in discussion of significant market issues. While sensible investors avoid
the all-too-prevalent "beauty contest" (in which a series of managers make difficult-to-
distinguish-between oral presentations in a hiring pageant), investment committee members do
benefit from face-to-face interaction with managers. Creating a forum for lively interaction
between managers and committee members adds value to the investment process. But, rather
than allowing managers to present "canned" portfolio appraisals, investment staff should
structure panel discussion to stimulate candid discussion of manager-specific approaches to
asset class pitfalls and opportunities.
Occasionally, committee meetings deal with market issues that cut across individual asset
classes. For example, the savings and loan debacle of the late 1980s informally influenced the
private equity, real estate, and absolute return asset classes. In the late 1990s the Internet mania
affected investments in the marketable equity, private equity, and absolute return asset classes.
Focusing attention on the broad implications of a particular market phenomenon enhances the
ability of an investment organization to pursue attractive strategies and to identify hidden risks.
Effective investors maintain focus on long-term policy targets, making the annual asset
allocation review the centerpiece of an investment fund's agenda. Devoting the meeting after
the close of the fiscal year to a thorough review of portfolio characteristics and performance
provides a report card for the past and a road map for the future. The two interim meetings
allow in-depth examination of a particular asset class or an interesting investment opportunity.
Hewing to a well-defined schedule of meetings provides a structure for effective decision
making and reduces the opportunity for committee and staff to make undisciplined moves.
DECISION-MAKING CHALLENGES
Effective endowment management processes encourage long-term investing. The universality
with which investors proclaim themselves long-term in orientation matches only the startling
degree to which short-term thinking drives investor decisions. Perhaps human nature dictates
that short-term issues overwhelm long-term considerations. Time horizons shrink with the
trauma of unexpected loss, the desire for immediate gratification, and the competitive need to
win.
The human desire to make a visible contribution shortens time horizons. Because
investment staff and trustees wish to leave their marks on the portfolio, potential problems
exist if the investment fund's horizon exceeds a staff member's expected tenure or trustee's
term. When managing perpetual life assets, explicit recognition of the discontinuity between
personal and institutional time frames facilitates effective decision making. Continuity in
management and governance provide another practical response.
Investors seeking short-term success will likely be frustrated by markets too efficient to offer
much in terms of easy gains. Even if managers find short-term opportunities to exploit, they
put themselves on a treadmill. As investors successfully exploit one short-term inefficiency, it
must be replaced by another position followed by another and yet another ad infinitum.
Creating wealth through a series of short-term investments is difficult, risky work. Moreover,
managers hoping to beat the market every quarter dramatically limit their investment universe,
pursuing only those mispricings likely to resolve themselves in the near term. Short-term
players create opportunities for those few who attempt to invest based on considered long-term
estimates.
True long-term investing dramatically broadens the investment opportunity set, allowing
investors to profit from the irrationality of short-term players. Yet, because long-term investing
involves an intrinsically higher risk profile, successful organizations must develop mechanisms
to cope with the associated risks.
Short-Term Thinking
Too many market players operate with short time horizons. Anecdotal evidence abounds that
many investment managers favor investment ideas that promise to pay off in three or six
months. At the same time, fear of failure causes portfolio managers to hug the benchmark to
avoid potentially disastrous falls to the bottom of the rankings. Mediocre performance
inevitably results, as managers incur high transactions costs pursuing second-rate ideas within
the context of an index-like portfolio.
Similar problems exist in the world of endowment management. Annual investment
performance comparisons create (or reflect?) a horse race mentality. An audience of trustees,
alumni, and faculty wait with great anticipation for the year-end results, comparing
performance numbers to those from the peer group with which the institution competes.
Short of beating an archrival at football, posting the highest one-year investment result ranks
near the top of the list of institutional aspirations. As if the one-year numbers were not
sufficiently short term, the consulting firm Cambridge Associates now publishes quarterly
results for endowment portfolios. Obviously, judging long-term pools of assets by trailing
three-month performance numbers induces the wrong kind of thinking, emphasizing short-
term considerations over all else.
Performance competition causes some institutions to engage in bizarre behavior, including
inflating published endowment values and reporting returns gross of fees. While secrecy
surrounding overreporting of endowment levels prevents accurate measurement, a distressingly
large number of institutions follow the practice of reporting gross returns. In the most recent
endowment return survey conducted by Cambridge Associates 8 percent of those participating
reported results before fees. Of what possible use are such numbers? From a budgetary
perspective, net returns provide useful data since institutions consume investment income after
fees. From an investment perspective, net returns allow measurement of true value added
relative to benchmarks. Barring a reasonable explanation, it appears that institutions report
gross returns simply to gain a dubious advantage in the annual investment derby.
Consensus-Driven Behavior
Endowment managers engage in behavior similar to mutual fund benchmark hugging with
peer group investment policies providing the stake to which an institution's asset allocation is
tethered. Varying too far from the group consensus exposes the manager to the risk of being
labeled unconventional. If the institution fails in its unusual approach, the policy will likely be
abandoned and the investment staff will likely be unemployed. In contrast, had the institution
failed with a standard institutional portfolio, policies may still be abandoned, but investment
professionals would likely remain gainfully, if not happily, employed.
Concern regarding peer behavior rests, in part, on a rational basis. Educational institutions
operate in a competitive environment, vying with one another for faculty, students,
administrators, and financial support. Endowment size helps define an institution's
competitive position, directly through provision of financial support and indirectly through
creation of reputational capital. If dramatically different investment policies cause one
university's endowment to decline precipitously, that institution may join a new, less
prestigious peer group, losing not only financial assets, but also the confidence of important
institutional constituencies. Conversely, unusual investment success enhances an institution's
financial and reputational position. Trustees, generally a risk averse lot, may prefer prospective
failure with a conventional portfolio to uncertain success with an unconventional approach.
However rational concern regarding peer behavior might be, if market participants weight
heavily the consensus portfolio in asset allocation deliberations, change becomes quite difficult.
In the extreme, fear of being different has everyone looking over their shoulder at everyone
clsc's portfolio and no one looking at fundamental portfolio structure. Sensible portfolio
management processes encourage the use of first principles to create portfolios appropriate for
the institution, not mindless replication of other institutional asset mixes.
Contrarian Opportunity and Risk
The attitude of portfolio managers contributes to the success or failure of an investment
program. Significant differences between successful investment operations and other well-run
business activities cause standard corporate management techniques to fail in the investment
world. Most businesses grow by feeding winners. Putting resources behind successful products
generally leads to larger, increasingly impressive gains. Ruthless cuts of failed initiatives preserve
corporate resources for more attractive strategies.
In contrast, investment success generally stems from contrarian impulses. View winners
suspiciously, consider reducing or even climinating previously successful strategies. Eye losers
hopefully; consider adding to the out-of-favor approach.
Contrarian investing represents more than a reflex action causing investors to mindlessly
"buy the dips." Out-of-favor positions must be supported by careful analysis of the
fundamental drivers of value. Investigation of the contrarian alternative both provides a
rationale for establishing the position and creates the conviction necessary to maintain the
position in the face of market skepticism. Do not expect immediate gratification. In fact, going
against the grain will likely appear foolish in the short run as already cheap assets become
cheaper, leaving the true contrarian fundamentally out of sync with investors more in tune
with the market.
Establishing and maintaining positions out of the mainstream requires decision making by
relatively small groups. As groups increase in size, consensus thinking increasingly dominates
the process. Behavioral studies identify a tendency for "group think." Most people so desire
conformity that they embrace obviously wrong positions to avoid being at odds with the
crowd.
Contrarian, long-term investing poses extraordinary challenges under the best of
circumstances. In an institutional environment with staff and committees and boards, nearly
insurmountable obstacles exist. Creating a decision-making framework that encourages
unconventional thinking constitutes a critical goal for fund fiduciarics.
Unfortunately, overcoming the tendency to follow the crowd, while necessary, proves
insufficient to guarantee investment success. By pursuing ill-considered, idiosyncratic policies,
market players expose portfolios to unnecessary, often unrewarded risks. While courage to take
a different path enhances chances for success, investors face likely failure unless a thoughtful set
of investment principles undergirds the courage.
New York University and Bonds
Even the most well-meaning fiduciaries, motivated by altruistic intentions, sometimes pursue
out of the mainstream policies which cause substantial economic and reputational damage.
The story of NYU's endowment management over the past two decades vividly illustrates the
dangers of implementing poorly founded investment strategies.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, motivated by concerns regarding the fragility of the
university's finances and the riskiness of the stock market, NYU allocated an average of 66
percent to bonds, 30 percent to stocks, and 4 percent to other assets. NYU differed materially
from her sister institutions by holding roughly double the average proportion of bonds and
roughly half the average proportion of stocks.
Between 1981 and 1982, at the bottom of the equity market, NYU dropped its already low
equity allocation from 33 percent to 7 percent of the portfolio, increasing the already high
bond commitment from 62 percent to 90 percent of assets. Bonds continued to maintain a
share in excess of 90 percent of assets through 1985, according to public reports on asset
allocation, while stocks languished at single-digit levels, falling as low as 3 percent of the
endowment. Even though after 1985 annual reports ceased to provide information on
portfolio allocations, it appears that NYU persisted with its unusual portfolio structure
throughout the late 1980s and early 1990s. After a nine-year disclosure hiatus, in 1995 the
university reported holding 86 percent of assets in bonds and 9 percent of assets in stocks,
indicating a continuing commitment to bonds. Only in 1997 did NYU begin to make a
modest move away from fixed income to higher expected return assets.
Unfortunately, the bond-dominated portfolio left NYU on the sidelines during one of the
greatest bull markets in history. From 1978 to 1998, stock returns exceeded bond returns in
sixteen of twenty years, with stocks enjoying a 6 percent per annum advantage over bonds.
Only in the aftermath of the 1987 crash did the fixed income strategy appear sensible, causing
NYU board chairman Larry Tisch to receive a standing ovation at a NYU investment
committee meeting. Market activity supported only a brief huzzah as the S&P 500 ended the
1987 calendar year 5.2 percent above the level recorded at the beginning of the year. Even when
viewed from the perspective of a time frame as short as the twelve calendar months that
included one of the all-time great stock market debacles, NYU's strategy failed to make sense.
As the bull market continued apace, Tisch turned away questions regarding the lack of
equity exposure by responding that "the train has left the station."10 Meanwhile, the
opportunity costs for the NYU endowment mounted. From 1982 to 1998, an endowment
wealth index for colleges and universities increased nearly eightfold, while NYU's endowment
grew 4.6 times.11 Had the institution's results simply mirrored college and university medians,
in 1998 NYU's endowment would have been nearly a billion dollars larger than the actual level
of $1.3 billion.
Beginning in the late 1990s, NYU began to reduce its overallocation to domestic fixed
income, moving assets to domestic and foreign equities and absolute return strategies. Yet the
legacy of the misguided bond bet endures, as NYU's 2005 portfolio shows scant exposure to
the important asset classes of private equity and real assets. By failing to understand the
relationship between the permanent nature of endowment funds and equity investments,
NYU's endowment sustained long lasting, if not permanent damage.
Boston University and Seragen
Boston University's investment in Scragen, championed by the institution's former president,
John Silber, posed a fundamentally different threat to the health of the university's finances. By
funneling as much as $90 million of operating and endowment funds into a single
biotechnology-based start-up company, Boston University made an unreasonably large bet on
an extremely high risk investment. 12
Silber first became interested in Seragen's "fusion toxins" at a 1986 lecture by Boston
University scientist and Seragen founder Dr. John R. Murphy. In 1987, the university plowed
$25 million of its $175 million endowment into the venture, buying a controlling interest from
a Norwegian pharmaceutical company. Over the years, through further equity investments,
operating support, and asset purchases, Boston University's exposure to Seragen went from
excessive to irresponsible. In exchange for massive injections of funds, the university obtained
control of the board, with Silber among the designated directors.
The institution's unusually concentrated, controlling position in Scragen attracted the
attention of the Massachusetts attorney general who caused the university to dilute its
ownership stake by pursuing public offerings. Even though share issuance raised more than $50
million in 1992 and 1993, Seragen's burn rate managed to outpace the cash inflows. By 1996,
cumulative losses amounted to $200 million, causing Dr. Murphy to disassociate himself from
Scragen, citing "business problems."
In spite of successes on the scientific front, Scragen's finances faltered, leading to delisting
from the Nasdaq in September 1997. The stock, which went public in April 1992 at $12 a
share and reached a high of $15 in January 1993, traded at 5/8 upon delisting. At the time,
Boston University's stake amounted to little more than $5 million.
Desperate to salvage value, in December 1997, Boston University infused a further $5
million into Scragen by purchasing money-losing assets and providing ongoing support from
the university's operating budget. By buying time, the institution managed to arrange an exit
from the financially troubled company through a sale to Ligand Pharmaceuticals in August
1998. On September 20, 1998, the New York Times reported that the value of Boston
University's position ultimately amounted to approximately $8.4 million, representing a loss of
more than 90 percent on cost. Had the university's Seragen stake been invested in a diversified
portfolio of stocks, the endowment would have benefited by avoiding the disastrous Scragen
loss as well as by appreciation of tens of millions of dollars on the equity positions.
Ironically, Silber's positive assessment of Seragen's science appears well-founded. The firm's
major drug, Interleukin-2, received FDA approval in February 1999. Yet the university stands
to accrue little benefit from the drug's commercial success as Boston University's economic
interest in the project diminished greatly with the Ligand takeover. Seragen's progress came too
late and cost too much t reward the firm's shareholders.
By "rolling the dice" with endowment investments Boston University violated fundamental
investment principles, providing a disservice to the institutions' constituents. Haunted by its
failure to invest in Alexander Graham Bell's invention of the telephone, the university vowed
not to repeat the mistake with Seragen. Unfortunately, spectacular investment success stories
become clear only after the fact, forcing sensible investors to avoid outsized bets. A high risk,
concentrated investment in Seragen, in the words of one faculty member, allowed Silber a shot
at leaving "as a legacy a gigantic endowment. "13 Fiduciary requirements, no matter how
liberally interpreted, fail to accommodate actions inconsistent with constructing a reasonably
diversified portfolio.
In pursuing investment policies motivated by a desire to create an impact, NYU and Boston
University inflicted serious damage on their portfolios of permanent assets. By playing a futile
market valuation game, NYU missed the benefits of one of the greatest bull markets ever. In an
ill-considered attempt to swing for the fences, Boston University suffered a dramatic direct loss
and incurred even greater opportunity costs. Responsible fiduciaries best serve institutions by
following basic investment principles, avoiding the temptation to pursue policies designed to
satisfy specific individual agendas.
PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT
Effective management of relationships between fiduciaries and investment advisors adds
substantial incremental value to the portfolio. Strong relationships based on mutual trust and
understanding allow money managers and clients to behave in an informed contrarian manner.
In the absence of well-grounded relationships, money managers place their business at risk and
clients run the risk of making ill-timed cash flow decisions, damaging the portfolio by buying
high and selling low.
Successful portfolio management depends on client comprehension of the investment
advisor's decision-making process. Without intimate knowledge of a firm's investment
principles, clients simply react to performance, a no win proposition. If fiduciaries chase
performance, funding a manager on a hot streak, disappointment results when the wind at the
manager's back inevitably dissipates. When contrarian instincts cause fiduciaries to back a
poorly performing manager, mediocre returns follow if poor performance persists because the
manager lacks skill. Distinguishing between good fortune and good judgment demands
thorough understanding of the manager's approach to investing.
Informed relationship management requires ongoing performance evaluation,
incorporating both qualitative and quantitative factors. Monitoring the quality and
commitment of a firm's principals plays a central role in assessing the ability of an organization
to achieve excellence. Other significant issues include fidelity to investment principles and
maintenance of an appropriate organizational structure. Regular face-to-face meetings between
fund managers and external advisors constitute the most important tool for performance
evaluation.
Portfolio return data provide essential hard input into the performance assessment process.
By comparing manager returns to passive market benchmarks and active manager benchmarks,
investors measure the successes and failures of an investment program. Sensible investors look
beyond the basic return data to understand the risks associated with the portfolios that
generated the returns.
Quantitative measures dominate performance evaluation exercises, reducing the complex
web of portfolio construction decisions to a precise presentation of return data. The stark
clarity of a set of historical performance numbers causes many investors to emphasize hard
quantitative tools at the expense of fundamentally important soft factors. Striking an
appropriate balance between quantitative and qualitative factors poses a challenge for fund
fiduciaries.
Sensible investors impose thoughtful limitations on a portfolio. By limiting commitments
to transparent, well-understood strategies, the universe of appropriate managers for a fund
coincides with the scope of that institution's expertise. While investors need not acquire the
depth of knowledge necessary to replicate an external advisor's investment management
process, careful clients obtain a complete understanding of portfolio strategies. Without a firm
grasp of the process, the client's role degrades to passive monitoring of performance, with the
dangers inherent in placing investment results foremost in manager evaluation.
Assessing the viability of manager relationships requires continuous monitoring of a
combination of qualitative and quantitative factors. Strong investment performance alone fails
to justify maintaining a manager relationship. If the sense of partnership diminishes because of
changes in people, philosophy, or structure, then tough-minded fiduciaries move on. Similarly,
weak performance fails to justify terminating an investment management contract. If strong
people in an appropriately structured firm pursue an intelligent approach to markets, elements
critical to investment success remain in place. While understanding the causes of poor
performance provides important insights for investment oversight, bad results in and of
themselves present no fundamental threat to an otherwise sound investment relationship.
Qualitative Factors
Just as qualitative considerations dominate hiring decisions, those same qualitative factors
dominate performance evaluations. If investment success simply required retaining managers
with strong performance and firing managers with weak performance, life would be simple.
Because the numbers provide only part of the story, difficult-to-evaluate qualitative factors play
a central role.
Just as the quality of people drives manager hiring decisions, monitoring the people
involved in the investment process drives relationship management. Short-run issues concern
the enthusiasm, motivation, and work ethic of investment advisors. Responsible fiduciaries
monitor the degree of an advisor's engagement, looking for warning signs of diminished
interest or commitment. In the long run, generational transition issues loom large.
Generational Transfer
While thoughtful planning by investment management organizations increases the likelihood
of successful transfer of responsibility from one generation to another, the process poses
significant challenges, particularly for smaller organizations. The idiosyncratic nature of small
entrepreneurial firms causes people to be far less interchangeable than would be the case at
larger bureaucratic money managers. People dominate process at smaller firms, producing
significant uncertainty in the period surrounding the old guard's retirement. Transferring
responsibility to younger colleagues inevitably alters the nature of the firm as the new decision
makers express their individual approach to markets. In short, the more attractive the
investment manager, the greater the challenge in passing the baton.
The venture capital community exhibits an unusual number of entrepreneurial firms that
succeed in spanning generations. By transferring responsibility seamlessly, early market
participants Sutter Hill (founded in 1962), Greylock (1965), Sequoia (1972), and Kleiner
Perkins (1972) each created and maintained leading positions in the venture capital
community. As a result of smooth general partner transitions and sustained investment success,
a number of well-established venture firms created franchise value, favorably positioning the
premier partnerships relative to the rest of the venture community. Outside of the private
equity world, few examples exist of small entrepreneurial investment firms retaining their
character through several generations of control. Some grow large, abandoning investment
goals to focus on asset gathering. Others, dependent on one or two individuals, fade away with
diminished participation from those who drove the investment process. Perhaps firms built on
the idiosyncratic brilliance of a successful investor stand little chance of transmitting essential
skills to younger associates. In any event, assessing the energy, commitment, and enthusiasm of
the individuals responsible for managing assets takes priority in monitoring relationships.
Firm Independence
The sale of an investment management firm requires immediate action. In a small,
independent partnership, economic fortunes of the principals correspond directly to the
success of the firm. The rewards associated with strong performance, and the penalties related
to poor results, accrue to the decision makers. Sales alter the equation dramatically.
After the sale, external owners prefer retaining assets by moderating investment bets,
increasing net client cash flow by enhancing marketing activities, and diversifying revenues by
expanding product offerings. On top of concerns regarding changes in corporate strategy, the
degree of commitment of investment professionals frequently wanes. Selling shareholders
retire to focus on other interests. The most talented young people leave to pursue
opportunities to create wealth, following in the footsteps of their now retired mentors. Those
who remain tend to be less adept with fewer alternatives. No advantage accrues to clients from
a sale.
Senior partners of successful independent investment managers face a dilemma. On the
positive side of the ledger, the sale of a firm produces a handsome payday for the equity owners
who walk away from the transaction with a small fortune. On the negative side, the sale sows
the seeds of the firm's denouement.
By not selling the firm, senior partners fail to maximize the value of their stake. In what
amounts to an act of noblesse oblige, younger principals receive equity interests for less than true
economic value, creating the potential for the firm to continue as an independent entity. No
guarantee of longevity exists, however, as the new owners now face the same dilemma their
erstwhile senior partners did.
Investment Approach
Changes in investment approach raise yellow flags for fiduciaries. Increases in assets under
management commonly alter investment methods. As assets increase, small-capitalization stock
managers purchase more and larger securities, increasing diversification and becoming less
small-capitalization-stock oriented. Some hedge funds, beginning as focused stock pickers,
evolve into shops making macro bets, as increases in size dictate playing in broad, deep, and
liquid markets.
Managers of all stripes face the temptation to become closet indexers. Running a market-
like portfolio guarantees market-like results, reducing the likelihood of being fired for poor
performance. When deep value managers report positions in growth companies, alert
fiduciaries pose skeptical questions.
Disappointing results sometimes lead managers to alter approaches to portfolio
management. Investment advisors may take greater risk, hoping to hit the long ball to recoup
earlier losses. At the extreme, pursuit of risk to remedy past losses exposes assets to significant
future losses as managers speculate in a desperate attempt to recover assets.
Poor results occasionally cause investors to undergo radical change, leading to bizarre
transformations. The Feshbach brothers, Matt, Joc, and Kurt, developed a high profile in the
1980s based on impressive investment returns and controversial short-selling techniques. Using
L. Ron Hubbard's Theory of Dianetics as an integral part of their investment strategy, the
Feshbach brothers focused on identifying overvalued companies headed for a tumble. Using
traditional securities analysis and private detectives to uncover fraudulent business practices,
the Feshbachs were widely rumored to "talk down" stocks in their portfolio. Accused of
"naked shorting to establish illegal short positions when unable to access securities through
legitimate channels, the brothers surrounded themselves with warning signs. Surprisingly,
many investors, including the Frank Russell Trust Company, ignored the controversy, chased
the Feshbachs' strong performance numbers, and committed funds to the brothers' pool,
which peaked at nearly $1 billion in 1990.
In the early 1990s the Feshbach wizardry disappeared, as the strategy of shorting securities
in a bull market produced the nearly inevitable disastrous results. After a spell of horrendous
performance, losing 55 percent of assets in 1991 alone, the Feshbach brothers reinvented
themselves.
In 1993, according to short seller David Rocker, the Feshbachs "publicly disavowed their
short selling activities... to focus on a strategy of small capitalization growth stocks." The
change in strategy, by the world's most notorious short sellers," akin to switching sides in the
middle of a battle, attracted more interest in the press than with investors. By 1998, the firm
managed $50 million, primarily in traditional long strategies, representing less than 5 percent
of peak assets under management. Apparently, the passage of time did little to improve the
Feshbach fortunes. A search of investment manager databases turned up very little beyond an
SEC Form 13-F for Matt Feshbach's MLF Investments. The December 31, 2007 filing reported
less than $60 million of positions.
Not all changes in approach bode ill for portfolio managers. For instance, a manager with a
narrowly focused opportunity set rides the investment roller coaster, rising when opportunity
abounds and plunging when deals dry up. Sensible managers adapt, altering strategy to exploit
the full range of opportunities within the advisor's area of competence. Many absolute return
managers began their businesses by focusing exclusively on merger arbitrage transactions.
Recognizing the complementary analytical and legal skills required to assess reorganizations
and bankruptcies, some firms started pursuing investments in the realm of distressed securities.
By adding a fundamentally related activity, managers created a powerful tool for portfolio
improvement. When merger and acquisition activity proceeded apace, portfolios held
significant positions in risk arbitrage. In less robust economic times, when workouts and
defaults littered the investment landscape, firms increased exposure to distressed investments.
In contrast to investors expert in only one discipline, managers with more than one arrow in
the quiver enjoy the opportunity to mitigate the cyclicality inherent in market activity.
Gradual, incremental changes in investment approach sensibly expand the scope of activity
without abandoning the base upon which the firm's success rests. Natural, evolutionary
improvement creates potential for enhancing portfolio results, benefiting external advisor and
client alike. Fundamental change poses danger to client assets, demanding a dramatic response
by fiduciaries.
Client Meetings
Regular face-to-face meetings between investment advisors and clients constitute the most
important tool for relationship management. Meetings allow challenges to existing processes
and exploration of new ideas. Frank discussion of advisor and client concerns contributes to
carly resolution of problems. While letters and phone conversations provide important input,
nothing matches the benefits of sitting down with an investment manager for an in-depth
review of portfolio activities.
Client responsibilities include being inquisitive without being intrusive. Respecting the
boundary between advisor and client requires avoiding behavior that makes investment
decisions difficult. Pushing advisors to take positions or discouraging specific investments
crosses the line. Challenging a manager's thought process or encouraging a contrarian play
contributes to successful relationships.
Investment advisor responsibilities include openness and honesty regarding portfolio
activity. Complete transparency in portfolio matters provides an essential foundation for client
understanding of the investment process. Occasionally, investment managers refuse to identify
positions, expressing concerns regarding public disclosure on ability to manage a position. If a
manager refuses to trust a client (or potential client) with portfolio information, the client
should not entrust the manager with a portfolio. Advisors benefit from better-informed clients
who tend to remain faithful during stretches of poor performance and facilitate sometimes
difficult contrarian strategies.
Openness regarding business issues allows advisor and client to understand the present and
to anticipate the future. Many business issues shape the character of a money management
firm. Compensation practices influence motivation and retention of investment professionals.
Succession planning tells as much about the character of the current generation as it does
about the next. Firms that engage clients in discussion regarding sensitive business issues face
stronger prospects of overcoming the difficulties inherent in running an investment
management operation.
Continuing due diligence checks on investment advisors contributes to effective
relationship management. Alert fiduciaries take advantage of opportunities to discuss with
third parties the business approach and ethical standards of existing managers, always
attempting to gain insight into external advisor characteristics. While less formal than the
round of reference checks undertaken before hiring a manager, ongoing due diligence provides
important insight into external advisor activities.
Regular interaction between client and advisor constitutes the most important tool for
relationship management, providing ongoing input for qualitative assessment of manager
activity. Constant reevaluation of the investment rationale contributes to effective oversight of
external money managers, causing fiduciaries to maintain an attitude of healthy skepticism
regarding active management activities.
Qualitative assessments of people, strategy, and structure lie at the core of relationship
management. Sensible fiduciaries regularly revisit the premises upon which original hiring
decisions rest, reviewing initial assumptions and subsequent behavior. Changes in an
investment advisory firm's circumstances require particularly careful evaluation, causing
prudent clients to underwrite once again the advisor's suitability.
Quantitative Factors
Beating the market, as described by a fair benchmark, constitutes the foremost objective of an
investment manager. Mature, liquid marketplaces offer a host of well-structured benchmarks
from which to choose. For example, U.S. cquity markets boast a variety of broad-based indices,
including the S&P 500, the Russell 3000, and the Wilshire 5000. The benchmark represents
the passive alternative, a portfolio that faithfully replicates asset class performance. Active
managers attempt to beat the benchmark, net of fees, in an effort to add value to the portfolio
management process.
In contrast to marketable securities, illiquid assets have less-well-defined, market-related,
performance measurement benchmarks. Private investments come from a wide variety of
sources, ranging from divisions of publicly traded companies to family-owned businesses to
entities in bankruptcy. Almost by definition, illiquid assets reside in markets without
benchmarks since an investable benchmark requires well-established, liquid markets.
Investors pursuing private opportunities employ jerry-rigged benchmarks, generally using a
derivative of a marketable securities metric, cither explicitly as in the S&P 500 plus 500 basis
points, or implicitly as in a real return of 12 percent (based, perhaps, on an expectation of 7
percent real returns for equities plus a 500 basis point premium).
Fiduciaries articulate a clear benchmark for each manager. In the liquid markets, a fair
benchmark encompasses all investment opportunities from which an active manager chooses.
The more liquid markets provide the best defined benchmarks, leading to the irony of precise
measurement in the markets least likely to produce something worth measuring. Managers
focusing on specific niches and investors pursuing activities in less efficient markets present
benchmarking challenges. Ultimately, the index against which fiduciaries assess performance
constitutes the manager's most important quantitative measure.
Benchmark Specialization
Investment consultants create and monitor an impressive number of specialized benchmarks,
providing apparently precise tools to measure performance of a broad range of strategies and
substrategies. Ranging from a reasonably standard matrix of style and capitalization indices to
a somewhat motley collection of esoteric measures, consultant benchmarks assess even the
most unusual approach to portfolio management.!!
Specialized benchmarks occasionally provide valuable insight unavailable from broader
measures of market activity. Consider the 2003 results for managers focusing on small-
capitalization stocks. Median returns of 45.7 percent bested the S&P 500 return by more than
17 percent, on the surface an excellent result. When compared to a small-capitalization
benchmark, however, the median results fall short of the passive alternative by 1.5 percent, a far
less impressive performance. The use of a specialized small-capitalization benchmark provides a
truer picture of active small-capitalization manager returns. 15 In the world of benchmark
comparisons, apples-to-apples provides more insight than apples-to-pears.
Specialized benchmarks sometimes require careful evaluation. Consider the results of value
investment strategies in the 1990s, a period when value managers generally failed to exceed
returns of a value benchmark. For the five years ending December 31, 1997, the value
benchmark placed in the second decile of value manager results, an extraordinary showing for a
passive portfolio, 16
Why did the value index crush the results of value managers? The value index, created by a
mechanistic screen that selected low price-to-book and low price-to-earnings ratio stocks,
included a number of unattractive, washed-out companies. Because active managers often
avoid obviously risky, distressed companies, typical active portfolios contain dampened value
characteristics. When value stocks perform well, active managers frequently fail to match
passive results, as markets reward the riskier profile of the mechanistically chosen portfolio.
Only in times of severe market stress do outcomes favor the higher quality actively managed
value portfolios.
Reasonable fiduciaries compare manager results to appropriate benchmarks. Examining
small-capitalization manager returns relative to the S&P 500 distorts the story. Comparing
value manager results to a broad-based index obscures the truth. Employing specialized passive
benchmarks provides a richer comparison, allowing more direct evaluation of style-specific
portfolios. When using specialized benchmarks, fair comparisons require an understanding of
the differences in risk profile between the active portfolio and the benchmark.
Peer Comparisons
Peer comparisons provide another quantitative metric for performance assessment. While
certain asset classes present less than satisfactory passive benchmarks, nearly every investment
category contains a group of managers among which results can be compared.
Survivorship bias and backfill bias play an important role in peer comparisons, particularly
in less efficient asset classes. Because market-related benchmarks provide so little short-term
guidance for private assets and absolute return strategies, peer comparisons take on more
significance. Unfortunately, in the absolute return arena, survivorship bias and backfill bias
dramatically influence the composition and character of the peer group. Private asset peer
groups suffer less extreme survivorship and backfill bias.
Risk Adjustment
Adjusting portfolio returns for risk plays at best a supporting role in performance evaluation.
Managers tend to avoid discussing risk, unless explaining poor relative performance, as in "we
did worse than the market, but we did it with less risk." Perhaps, the poor picture of risk
provided by quantitative tools justifies the low level of discussion.
Standard deviation of returns, the measure of dispersion most commonly used to assess risk,
fails to capture much of what concerns fiduciarics. Simply understanding the historical
volatility of returns provides little useful information regarding the efficacy of a particular
investment strategy. The fundamental risk of the underlying investment matters, not the
security price fluctuation. In a world characterized by excessive price volatility, security prices
mask true investment risk. In spite of its limitations, historical volatility is the most widely
employed quantitative measure of risk.
Nobel laureate William Sharpe developed an analytical tool to assess the relationship
between risk and return. By evaluating returns above (or below) the risk-free rate, the Sharpe
ratio focuses on the generation of excess returns. Dividing the excess return by the standard
deviation of returns produces a ratio describing the productivity of risk, quantifying the excess
return generated per unit of risk incurred. However, Sharpe's ratio suffers from the same
obvious shortcomings as do other measures of historical volatility.
The American Government Securities Fund
Consider the results of the Piper Jaffrey American Government Securities Fund (AGF), a
mortgage bond investment vehicle, for the five years ending December 31, 1993. As shown in
Table 10.1, AGF returned 19.3 percent per annum, representing a 13.7 percent annual
premium over Treasury bills. Since volatility of 8.8 percent accompanied the excess return,
AGF delivered a Sharpe ratio of 1.6 units of return for each unit of risk assumed.
From an investment perspective, AGF's 19.3 percent return appears at first glance to
overshadow the 11.2 percent return of the Salomon Brothers Mortgage Index. However,
because the mortgage index produced excess returns of 5.5 percent with substantially lower
volatility than AGF, the bond fund and the index sport nearly identical Sharpe ratios for the
period. In other words, AGF's higher returns appear to stem from accepting higher risk, not
from generating superior risk-adjusted returns. Sharpe's ratio levels the playing field.
Even though the Sharpe ratio illuminates historical relationships between risk and return,
backward-looking quantitative measures fail to capture fundamental risk factors other than
those in the numbers. When the future differs in material ways from the past, investment
choices based on quantitative analysis frequently disappoint investors.
Table 10.1 Alternative Bond Fund Characteristics
Mortgage-Backed Security Returns, 1989-1995
Five years ending
December 31, 1993
One year ending
December 31, 1994
Five years ending
December 31, 1994
One year ending
December 31, 1995
Five years ending
December 31, 1995
Salomon Mortgage Index
Sourcer Bloombery and Yale Investments Office.
AGF
Salomon Mortgage Index
AGF
Salomon Mortgage Index
AGF
Salomon Mortgage Index
AGF
Salomon Mortgage Index
AGF
Return Excess Return
19.3%
13.7%
11.2
5.5
28.8
327
5.3
8.5
7.8
25.9
16.8
11.3
8.9
3.0
20.3
11.1
7.0
4.6
1.6
1.6
Risk Sharpe Ratio
8.8%
3.5
14.9
4.0
12.3
3.5
-22
5.8
3.2
12.2
3.3
-1.4
0.3
0.9
3.5
3.5
0.6
1.4
The 1994 bond market debacle crushed the Piper Jaffrey AGF mortgage fund, causing
losses of nearly 29 percent with a risk level of nearly 15 percent. The Salomon Brothers
Mortgage Index fared somewhat better, as returns of -1.4 percent came with a risk level of 4.0
percent. AGF's Sharpe ratio of -2.2 for 1994 indicates risk-adjusted performance dramatically
inferior to the index with its ratio of -1.4.
Quantitative characteristics of AGF's mortgage strategy change dramatically as the trailing
five-year assessment period moves forward to include 1994. By including 1994's poor
performance and volatility, returns drop from 19.3 percent for the five years ending December
31, 1993 to 8.5 percent for the five years ending December 31, 1994, even as volatility increases
from 8.8 percent to 12.3 percent. Suddenly the double-digit return with single-digit risk
becomes a single-digit return with double-digit risk.
The Sharpe ratio story reads even worse. Annualized returns for AGF of 8.5 percent over
the five-year period ending December 31, 1994 generate excess returns of 3.7 percent at a risk
level of 12.3 percent. The resulting Sharpe ratio of 0.3 compares unfavorably to the ratio of 1.6
for the five years ending December 31, 1993. Even though the investment strategy remained
firmly in place, market conditions caused what appeared to be a reasonably efficient, high-risk
strategy into a low-return, high-risk technique.
In contrast, the five-year mortgage index return of 7.8 percent for the period ending
December 31, 1994, along with excess returns of 3.0 percent and risk of 3.5 percent provides a
superior set of characteristics. Although the risk-adjusted attributes of the mortgage index
deteriorate with the addition of 1994's data, the index's Sharpe ratio of 0.9 indicates a material
advantage over AGF's 0.3 level.
While quantitative risk assessment helps investors take a disciplined, analytical approach to
assessing investment opportunities, the limitations of backward-looking number crunching
become apparent when markets produce surprises. Based on data for the five years ending
December 31, 1993, Piper Jaffrey's AGF and the Salomon Mortgage Index garnered identical
Sharpe ratios, indicating roughly equivalent efficacy in translating risk into excess return.
Moving forward one year makes the turtle-like index appear much more attractive than the
hare-like mortgage fund.
In the case of the Piper Jaffrey mortgage fund, historical return and risk characteristics
point investors toward poor timing decisions. In late 1993, attracted by high returns and index-
like efficiency, investors saw ample reason to purchase shares of the fund. In late 1994,
disappointed by terrible returns and poor relative efficiency, investors found clear justification
to sell shares. Of course, in 1995, in spite of poor trailing five-year quantitative characteristics,
the fund returned 25.9 percent, vastly exceeding the index returns and matching the index
delivery of excess return per unit of risk.
The only defense against chasing the excellent 1993 numbers and avoiding the dismal 1994
returns lies in fundamental understanding of the nature of the investment activity producing
the results. Investors making decisions based only on historical numbers focus exclusively on
what has been, ignoring what will be. While looking into the future poses challenges fraught
with peril, investors armed with a thorough grasp of the forces driving valuations face a higher
probability of success. At the very least, investors cognizant of the nature of AGF's mortgage
portfolio recognized the contribution of leverage to 1993's strong performance and considered
the danger of an extreme reversal in a 1994 type of environment.
Risk adjustment matters. Unfortunately, reducing risk assessment to a single statistical
measure fails to capture the essence of the concept. Prudent investors employ risk measure with
care, supplementing the science with careful interpretation.
Rates of Return
The most basic financial tools measure returns either weighted by dollars or linked across time.
Dollar-weighted returns, or internal rates of return (IRR), assess results considering the
magnitude and timing of dollars invested. IRR calculations best measure returns for
investment managers that control cash flow decisions, such as private equity investors who
determine when and how much to invest in particular opportunities.
Time-linked returns derive from a series of periodic returns, without considering portfolio
size at any point in time. Time-linked returns best measure results for managers that do not
control cash flow decisions, such as marketable securities managers that accept contributions
and withdrawals based on client decisions.
Barr Rosenberg's Value Added
Rosenberg Institutional Equity Management's (RIEM's) core equity product provides an
interesting example of differences in dollar-weighted and time-weighted returns. As illustrated
in Table 10.2 RIEM began corporate life with extremely strong returns on relatively small
amounts of money. Following a pattern typical in the investment management industry,
impressive results attracted large new accounts, with assets peaking at more than $8,100
million in 1990. As asset size created a headwind or as good fortune dissipated, poor
investment performance followed, exposing large amounts of money to sub-standard
management.
Over the firm's roller-coaster history, time-linked investment performance remained
consistently positive. For the twelve years ending December 31, 1997, RIEM's core equity
portfolio returned 17.3 percent per year, cking out a 30 basis point advantage relative to the
S&P 500.
Dollar-weighted returns tell a less inspiring story. IRR calculations show a return of 11.8
percent per annum. Had RIEM's cash flows been invested in the S&P 500, the resulting IRR
would have been 13.1 percent per annum. Over the life of the core portfolio, REIM's clients
lost 1.3 percent annually relative to the market, translating into approximately $500 million of
opportunity costs.
Date (Year
End)
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
Table 10.2 Rosenberg Fails to Deliver Valuc to Clients
Portfolio Returns and Value Added, 1985-1997
1993
1994
Core Equity Assets Excess Return (RIEM Return-S&P 500
(millions)
$188
1,037
2,037
8,020
8,157
6,608
3,692
3,692
1,838
1995
2,225
1996
1997
2,023
1,644
Source: Nelson's Directory of Investment Managers, 1985-1997.
Return)
6.2%
04
6.6
...
-0.6
4.8
3.9
1.1
-1.0
0.8
1.2
Value Added
(millions)
$12
134
-23
-386
-304
-52
143
-19
17
-58
20
In evaluating marketable security performance, both time-linked and dollar-weighted
returns prove helpful. Time-linked returns provide evidence regarding a manager's investment
acumen. Dollar-weighted returns shed light on cash flow timing decisions made by investors.
When evaluating private investment performance, dollar-weighted returns provide the most
appropriate measurement tool, as private investors control cash flow decisions.
Successful portfolio management combines art and science, requiring qualitative and
quantitative assessment of investment strategies. While quantitative measures provide essential
data for decision makers, reasonable fiduciaries guard against placing too much emphasis on
easily quantified factors at the expense of less easily measured qualitative factors. Successful
relationship management demands placing soft factors in a place of primary importance. The
numbers, while important, play a supporting role.
Use of Performance Assessment
Investors employ performance assessment to hire managers, size accounts, and fire managers,
with the choice of time frame providing a critical variable in the evaluation process.
Thoughtful use of performance data creates opportunities to add substantial incremental
returns, while misdirected actions readily destroy value.
The appropriate time frame for performance assessment depends on the asset class involved
and management style employed. Feedback mechanisms operate over different cycles. Money
market investments provide nearly immediate feedback, as assets mature within a matter of
months, either successfully or not. The short cycle provides fiduciaries with substantial
amounts of round-trip data. Unfortunately, in the highly efficient money markets, the
information generates little opportunity to add value.
Private investing stands at the opposite end of the spectrum. Holding periods for assets span
as much as a decade, forcing fiduciaries to make manager retention decisions well before
meaningful feedback comes from recent investment activity. The long private investing cycle
causes investors to make decisions based on factors other than near term investment
performance.
Other asset classes fall between the money market and private equity extremes. The time
necessary for feedback mechanisms to operate corresponds roughly to the manager's
investment horizon. The shorter the horizon, the shorter the time needed to assess manager
skill. In the marketable securities realm, high turnover indicates a relatively short-term horizon,
suggesting short-term evaluation of the manager's trades. Consider the fact that 200 percent
turnover corresponds to a six-month average holding period. In contrast, 20 percent turnover
corresponds to a five-year average holding period. Low turnover strategies deserve longer-term
evaluation, allowing time for the investment manager's strategy to play out. In the realm of
private investing, time horizons appropriate for manager evaluation extend much longer.
While portfolio turnover identifies the average holding period for positions and suggests an
appropriate minimum time frame for evaluating money manager trades, market forces often
befog the view of manager performance. Multiyear moves in the relative attractiveness of small
versus large and value versus growth highlight the importance of employing appropriate
benchmarks and lengthen the time required to assess manager skill. Serious investors avoid hair
trigger decisions, opting instead for careful, deliberate assessments that span the market cycle
appropriate to a specific manager.
Performance evaluation ultimately determines the fiduciary's degree of confidence in an
external money manager. Reassessing manager relationships places investors in an
uncomfortable position, as reasonable investors engage investment advisors with a view toward
establishing long-term relationships. Questioning the validity of the original hiring decision
and examining the continued viability of the investment relationship causes some measure of
cognitive dissonance. Careful fiduciaries seek stable, long-term arrangements, even while
evaluating their dissolution.
The degree of confidence in particular managers influences portfolio allocations, with high
confidence managers receiving greater funding levels. Periodic reviews of manager account sizes
allow portfolios to reflect opinions regarding relative manager skill levels. Well-considered
manager allocations incorporate factors other than confidence levels, including the appeal of
the manager's particular strategy as well as the number of managers available to exploit a
specific type of opportunity. That said, performance evaluation plays a dominant role in
determining allocations.
With a clear grasp of a manager's approach to markets, clients obtain opportunities to add
value through the portfolio rebalancing process. If manager account sizes generally reflect
fiduciary preferences, recent performance might be used as a secondary indicator for targeting
contributions and withdrawals. Even the most skilled managers experience periods of
underperformance, attributable to positions that, once established, perform contrary to
expectations. If, in the face of poor results, the original investment case remains intact, adding
funds to an out-of-favor strategy increases exposure to a now even more attractively priced
opportunity. Managers tend to react positively to the vote of confidence implicit in client cash
flows arriving after a period of poor results.
In contrast, following periods of better than expected performance, thoughtful clients
consider reducing account size. Extraordinary performance likely stems from a combination of
manager skill and fortuitous market conditions. Reducing the account of an outperforming
manager and reallocating funds to weaker performers generally enhances performance. While
managers enjoy receiving cash flow, particularly when their investment style lacks favor in the
marketplace, managers dislike disgorging funds. Managers frequently blame the market for
poor results; skill completely explains their strong performance.
In any event, reasonable clients avoid costly disruptive cash flow requests. Withdrawals
require particular care, since incurring unnecessary transactions costs dampens portfolio
returns. Contributions to poor performers and withdrawals from strong performers might be
made as part of a fund's rebalancing activity, generating only transactions already required for
risk control purposes and facilitating low-cost repositioning of the portfolio.
Manager Termination
The impetus for manager termination generally falls into one of two broad categories. First, the
initial hiring decision may have been a mistake. Regardless of the thoroughness of due diligence
efforts, the true nature of an investment relationship emerges only after advisor and client work
together for a period of time. Reexamination of initial assumptions causes fiduciaries to
continue to learn about the manager's process, either reinforcing the work that supported the
hiring decision or exposing shortcomings in the original analysis. Second, changes in people,
philosophy, and structure require reassessment of manager relationships. Significant changes
prompt sensible fiduciaries to take a fresh look at the manager, subjecting the relationship to a
thorough reevaluation.
The most difficult part of managing a portfolio of external advisors involves termination of
unsatisfactory relationships. The unpleasant nature of firing a manager causes many investors
stay with dysfunctional manager-client relationships far longer than prudent.
Rationalizations for maintaining the status quo abound, providing superficial justification for
avoiding the unpleasant task at hand.
Top-notch fiduciaries approach the manager evaluation task with a cool analytical mindset
that borders on heartlessness. Once investors determine that mistakes led to the hiring of a
manager or changes in circumstance cause the manager to be unfit, the termination notice
must follow. In the final analysis, careful fiduciaries ask if the manager would be hired today. A
negative answer points to termination.
CONTROL ENVIRONMENT
Back office operations represent a significant, yet often overlooked, source of risk. Operational
controls do not appear on the radar screens of most institutional fund managers, a
prefer to deal with the engaging issues surrounding portfolio management strategies. Fund
managers ignore control environment issues at their peril; a major operational failure moves
investors
internal control issues from an obscure place in the background to an embarrassing role on
center stage.
Endowment fund investors face control risks internally and externally. Internal control risks
consist of exposures created at fund headquarters in the course of day-to-day portfolio
management activities. If all assets were managed in-house, investors would face only internal
control issues. Conventional audit procedures focus on internal practices, examining the
efficacy and integrity of systems designed to support investment operations. External control
risks consist of exposures created at outside managers. Traditional audit activities rarely assess
directly the control systems of external investment managers, relying instead on work
conducted by other professional service firms. Since a chain is only as strong as the weakest
link, both internal fund operations and external manager back office operations require careful
examination and oversight.
Inadequate control environments provide fertile breeding grounds for problems ranging in
severity from continual imposition of small costs to sudden headline-grabbing disasters. Poorly
conceived controls expose investors to the possibility of fraud and malfeasance. Pain avoidance
requires careful planning. Unfortunately, institutions tend to focus on mundane back office
operations only after incurring significant losses.
Investment organizations benefit from regular, independent, intensive external review of
operational practices. For simple portfolio structures, internal and external auditors provide a
comprehensive look at investment activity, examining relatively basic issues related to
safekeeping portfolios of standard marketable securities. As increasingly sophisticated portfolio
management activities add layers of complexity, generalist auditors face a dramatically more
difficult task. To deal effectively with more complex investment programs, sensible fiduciaries
engage high quality specialists to assess internal and external practices, providing an important
tool for evaluating an often-ignored aspect of investment management.
A strong audit team from a first-class firm constitutes the first line of defense against
internal control problems. While a thorough audit represents an important starting point, in
today's investment management world, routine annual reviews no longer adequately assess
portfolio practices. Occasional, "no holds barred" special audits by a team of experts provide
important strategic insights into risks confronting fund fiduciaries, allowing remediation of
existing issues and mitigation of potential problems.
Special Audits
Effective special audits engage high quality experts in an unrestricted, independent review of
control practices. By bringing a fresh perspective to the oversight process, the investigative team
causes staff members to revisit comfortable assumptions regarding internal operations,
challenging individuals to improve existing procedures. Best practices provide a standard
against which to measure current activities and future efforts.
Since 1990, Yale twice employed PricewaterhouseCoopers and once employed Deloitte &
Touche to undertake top-to-bottom examinations of the university's investment operations.
The first review provided a substantial amount of useful feedback, highlighting the risks in
security lending activitics. Prompted by the PricewaterhouseCoopers report, the university
took a fresh look at the internally managed security loan program, concluding that structural
changes in the market had transformed a once attractive opportunity into an unattractive risk-
reward activity. As a result, the university discontinued its security lending operations, a move
that appeared prescient when the Common Fund's security lending debacle became public
sometime later. III
A second special audit of Yale's investment operations by PricewaterhouseCoopers
concluded that, while industry "best practices" characterized the university's monitoring of
external manager back offices, room for improvement existed. Standard industry practice
involves relatively superficial investigation of internal controls at external managers, if such
controls receive any attention at all. Since external manager control processes contribute to the
integrity of the overall control framework within which the endowment operates, the
university's risk exposure depends on the quality of these sometimes superficially evaluated
manager operations.
PricewaterhouseCoopers concluded that Yale had an opportunity to redefine industry
standards by understanding and improving the financial control environment, internally and
externally. The basic job description involves evaluating regulatory compliance, internal
operations, accounting and trading systems, legal and auditing professional support, as well as
policies for asset valuation, risk assessment, derivatives, and soft dollars. Yale's compliance
efforts create opportunities to reduce risk by introducing superior practices identified at onc
manager to other managers, thereby improving control processes across the entire portfolio.
Not only does the university benefit from evidence gathered when examining the control
environment at outside managers, the evaluation process communicates the importance Yale
attaches to strong internal operations. Such attention prompts managers to focus appropriate
levels of time and energy on back office activities.
CONCLUSION
One of the most important distinctions in the investment management arena separates those
investors with the ability to make high quality active management decisions from those
investors without the resources to make such decisions. Active management opens up the
possibility of employing asset classes that require superior investment skill-absolute return,
private equity, and real assets. As an added attraction, active management provides the
possibility of producing market-beating results in domestic and foreign marketable equities. In
contrast, without active management skill, prudent investors limit choices to passively
managed marketable security asset classes. Only foolish investors pursue casual attempts to beat
the market, as such casual attempts provide the fodder for the skilled investors' market-beating
results.
A disciplined framework for decision making underpins successful investment operations.
Clear definition of the respective roles of staff and committee ensures that staff members drive
the process, while committee members provide effective oversight. Without a rigorous process,
informed by thorough analysis and implemented with discipline, investment portfolios tend to
follow the whims of fashion. Casually researched, consensus-oriented investment positions
provide little prospect for producing superior results in the intensely competitive investment
management world.
An effective investment process reduces the inevitable gap between the goals of the
institution and the actions of the portfolio's stewards. Trustees strive to make a difference
during their tenure, while staff members seek job security, with both aspirations potentially at
odds with long-term institutional goals. By establishing and maintaining investment operations
as part of the fabric of the institution, fiduciaries increase the likelihood of placing institutional
needs ahead of personal interests.
Intermediaries, such as consultants and funds of funds, add another layer to the investment
process, introducing a dysfunctional filter that serves to impair returns. Institutions that avoid
employing intermediaries and engage dedicated staff resources stand a far better chance of
success.
A sound decision-making process contributes significantly to investment success, allowing
investors to pursue potentially interesting, long-term contrarian investment positions. By
reducing pressures to perform quarter-to-quarter, liberated managers gain the freedom to
create portfolios positioned to take advantage of opportunities created by short-term players.
An environment that encourages managers to make potentially embarrassing out-of-favor
investments and tolerates the inevitable missteps increases the likelihood of investment success.
Long-term success requires individualistic contrarian behavior based on a foundation of
sound investment principles. An effective framework overcomes the handicap of group
decision making and promotes well-considered risk taking. A thoughtful, high quality
governance process serves as an essential underpinning of a successful investment program.
Sensible investors assess investment advisory relationships with a balance of soft qualitative
attributes and hard quantitative characteristics. Qualitative factors play a central role in
manager evaluations, placing people at the core of portfolio structuring decisions. Critical
variables include the quality of investment professionals, the strength of the investment
philosophy, and the character of the organizational structure. Regular face-to-face meetings
constitute the most important manager monitoring tool.
Quantitative management tools include return data on individual portfolios, market
benchmarks, and active manager universes. Overreliance on the neat precision of numerical
results frequently leads to poor decisions. Investors looking only at the numbers face the
prospect of buying high and selling low, making commitments prompted by strong results and
withdrawing funds based on poor performance.
Successful investment programs require open, honest relationships between institutional
clients and external money managers. Direct, frequent communication allows investors to take
advantage of market opportunities. When declining prices allow purchase of assets on
attractive terms, high quality clients provide incremental funds to exploit the opportunity.
Conversely, thoughtful money managers with relatively few attractive opportunities return
funds to clients. Such activity takes place only when a high degree of confidence and trust exists
between money managers and clients.
Performance evaluation drives portfolio allocation decisions, as conclusions regarding
manager ability influence the confidence of fiduciaries. In many respects, the investor faces a
binary decision. If confidence exists, fiduciaries muster the courage necessary to behave in a
contrarian manner, supporting managers experiencing a spell of poor results. If a fiduciary
lacks the confidence to increase exposure to an underperforming manager, either the manager
or the fiduciary should go.
1. My 2005 book, Unconventional Suces A Fundamental Approach to Personal Investment, covers the investment
issues faced by investors without the resources to pursue active management programs.
II. For example, consider the Bloomberg Football Index, an index of companies that own or operate English and
Scottish football clubs.
III. Yale's security lending operation, managed much more conservatively than The Common Fund's, pursued a
matched book strategy. That is, maturities of security loans matched maturities of investments, with the university
generating returns by accepting credit risk in the reinvestment vehicle. Prompted to examine the issue by the
PricewaterhouseCoopers study, Yale concluded that spreads were too thin to justify continuing the security lending
operation. The Common Fund, motivated by the thin spreads in a matched book operation, took significantly greater
risk in an effort to generate a meaningful return. See Chapter 6.