7
Traditional Asset Classes
The definition of an asset class employs both art and science in an attempt to combine like
with like, secking as an end result a relatively homogenous collection of investment
opportunities. Appropriately defined asset classes include groups of positions that collectively
provide a coherent contribution to an investor's portfolio.
Traditional asset classes share a number of critical attributes. First, traditional asset classes
contribute basic, valuable, differentiable characteristics to an investment portfolio. Second,
traditional holdings rely fundamentally on market-generated returns, not on active
management of portfolios. Third, traditional asset classes derive from broad, deep, investable
markets.
The basic, valuable, differentiable characteristics contributed by traditional asset classes
range from provision of substantial expected returns to protection against financial crises.
Careful investors define asset class exposures narrowly enough to ensure that the investment
vehicle accomplishes its expected task, but broadly enough to encompass a critical mass of
assets.
Traditional asset classes rely fundamentally on market-generated returns, providing
reasonable certainty that various portfolio constituents fulfill their appointed missions. In
those cases where active management proves essential to the success of a particular asset class,
the investor relies on unusual ability or good fortune to produce results. If an active manager
exhibits poor skill or experiences bad luck, the investor suffers as the asset class fails to achieve
its goals. Because traditional asset classes depend on market-driven returns, investors need not
rely on serendipity or the supposed expertise of market players.
Traditional holdings trade in broad, decep, investable markets. Market breadth promises an
extensive array of choices. Market depth implics a substantial volume of offerings for individual
positions. Market investability assures access by investors to investment opportunities.
Traditional asset classes occupy well-established, enduring marketplaces.
Traditional asset classes encompass stocks and bonds. Asset classes that investors employ to
drive portfolio returns include domestic equity, forcign developed market cquity, and emerging
market equity. Equity exposure can be diversified by holdings of U.S. Treasury bonds, which
promise protection from financial catastrophe. Traditional asset classes provide several of the
basic building blocks required by investors to create a well-diversified portfolio.
Descriptions of traditional asset classes help investors understand the role that various
investment vehicles play in a portfolio. By assessing an asset class's expected returns and risks,
likely response to inflation, and anticipated interaction with other asset classes, investors
develop the knowledge required to build a portfolio. An outline of issues surrounding
alignment of interests between issuers of securities and owners of securities illustrates the
potential pitfalls and possible benefits of participating in certain asset categories.
DOMESTIC EQUITY
Investment in domestic equities represents ownership of a piece of corporate America.
Holdings of U.S. stocks constitute the core of most institutional and individual portfolios,
causing Wall Street's ups and downs to drive investment results for many investors. While a
large number of market participants rely far too heavily on marketable equitics, U.S. stocks
deserve a prominent position in investment portfolios.
Domestic stocks play a central role in investment portfolios for good theoretical and
practical reasons. The expected return characteristics of equity instruments match nicely with
the need to generate substantial portfolio growth over the sweep of time. To the extent that
history provides a guide, long-term returns encourage investors to own stocks. Jeremy Siegel's
203 years of data show U.S. stocks earning 8.4 percent per annum, while Roger Ibbotson's
eighty years of data show stocks earning 11.1 percent per annum.! No other asset class
possesses such an impressive record of long-term performance.
The long-term success of equity-dominated portfolios matches expectations formed from
fundamental financial principles. Equity investments promise higher returns than bond
investments, although in the short run the prospect of higher returns sometimes remains
unfulfilled. Not surprisingly, the historical record of generally strong equity market returns
contains several extended periods that remind investors of the downside of equity ownership.
In the corporate capital structure, equity represents a residual interest that exhibits value only
after accounting for all other claims against the company. The higher risk of equity positions
leads rational investors to demand higher expected returns.
Stocks exhibit a number of attractive characteristics that stimulate investor interest.
Interests of shareholders and corporate management tend to be aligned, allowing outside
owners of shares some measure of comfort that corporate actions will benefit both
shareholders and management. Stocks generally provide protection against unexpected
increases in inflation, although the protection proves notoriously unreliable in the short run.
Finally, stocks trade in broad, deep, liquid markets, affording investors access to an impressive
range of opportunities. Equity investments deserve a thorough discussion, since in many
respects they represent the standard against which market observers evaluate all other
investment alternatives.
Equity Risk Premium
The equity risk premium, defined as the incremental return to equity holders for accepting risk
above the level inherent in bond investments, represents one of the investment world's most
critically important variables. Like all forward-looking metrics, the expected risk premium
stands shrouded in the uncertainties of the future. To obtain clues about what tomorrow may
have in store, thoughtful investors examine the characteristics of the past.
Yale School of Management Professor Roger Ibbotson produces a widely used set of capital
market statistics that reflect an eighty-year stock-and-bond return differential of 5.7 percent per
annum.1 Wharton Professor Jeremy Siegel's 203 years of data show a risk premium of 3.0
percent per annum.2 Regardless of the precise number, historical risk premia indicate that
equity owners enjoyed a substantial return advantage over bondholders."
The size of the risk premium proves critically important in the asset allocation decision.
While history provides a guide, careful investors interpret past results with care. Work on
survivorship bias by Phillipe Jorion and William Goetzmann demonstrates the unusual nature
of the U.S. equity market experience. The authors examine the experience of thirty-nine
markets over a seventy-five-year period, noting that "(m)ajor disruptions have afflicted nearly all
of the markets in our sample, with the exception of a few such as the United States."3
The more-or-less uninterrupted operation of the U.S. stock market in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries contributed to superior results. Jorion and Goetzmann find that the U.S.
market produced 4.3 percent annualized real capital appreciation from 1921 to 1996. In
contrast, the other countries, many of which experienced economic and military trauma,
posted a median real appreciation of only 0.8 percent per year. Thoughtful market observers
place the exceptional experience of the U.S. equity markets in a broader, less-compelling
context.
Even if investors accept U.S. market history as definitive, reasons exist to doubt the value of
the past as a guide to the future. Consider stock market performance over the past two
hundred years. The returns consist of a combination of dividends, inflation, real growth in
dividends, and rising valuation levels. According to an April 2003 study by Robert Arnott,
aptly titled "Dividends and the Three Dwarfs," dividends provide the greatest portion of long-
term equity returns. Of the Arnott study's two-hundred-year 7.9 percent annualized total
return from equities, fully 5.0 percentage points come from dividends. Inflation accounts for
1.4 percentage points, real dividend growth accounts for 0.8 percentage points, and rising
evaluation accounts for 0.6 percentage points. Arnott points out that the overwhelming
importance of dividends to historical returns "is wildly at odds with conventional wisdom,
which suggests that ... stocks provide growth first and income second."
Arnott uses his historical observations to draw some inferences for the future. He
concludes, with dividend yields below 2.0 percent (in April 2003), that unless real growth in
dividends accelerates or equity market valuations rise, investors face a future far less
remunerative than the past. (Note that in August 2007 the dividend yield of the S&P 500
stood at 1.75 percent). Observing that real dividends showed no growth from 1965 to 2002,
Arnott holds out little hope of dividend increases driving future equity returns. The alternative
of relying on increases in valuations assigned to corporate carnings for future equity market
growth serves as a thin reed upon which to build a portfolio.
Simple extrapolation of past returns into the future assumes implicitly that past valuation
changes will persist in the future. In the specific case of the U.S. stock market, expectations that
history provides a guide to the future suggest that dividends will grow at unprecedented rates
or ever-higher valuations will be assigned to corporate earnings. Investors relying on such
forecasts depend not only on the fundamental earning power of corporations, but also on the
stock market's continued willingness to increase the price paid for corporate profits.
As illogical as it seems, one popular bull market tome published in 1999 espoused the view
that equity valuation would continue to increase unabated, arguing for a zero equity risk
premium. Advancing the notion that over long periods of time equities always outperform
bonds, in Dow 36,000: The New Strategy for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the Stock
Market, James Glassman and Kevin Hassett conclude that equities exhibit no more risk than
bonds.5 The authors ignore the intrinsic differences between stocks and bonds that clearly
point to greater risk in stocks. The authors fail to consider experiences outside of the United
States where equity markets have on occasion disappeared, leading to questions about the
inevitability of superior results from long-term equity investment. Perhaps most important,
the authors overestimate the number of investors that operate with twenty- or thirty-year time
horizons and underestimate the number of investors that fail to stay the course when equity
markets falter.
Finance theory and capital markets history provide analytical and practical underpinnings
to the notion of a risk premium. Without expectations of superior returns for risky assets, the
financial world would be turned on its head. In the absence of higher expected returns for
fundamentally riskier stocks, market participants would shun equitics. For example, in a world
where bonds and stocks share identical expected returns, rational investors would opt for the
equal-expected-return, lower-risk bonds. No investor would hold equal-expected-return,
higher-risk stocks. The risk premium must exist for capital markets to function effectively.
While an expected risk premium proves necessary for well-functioning markets, Jorion and
Goetzmann highlight the influence of survivorship bias on perceptions of the magnitude of the
risk premium. Arnott's deconstruction of equity returns and analysis of historical trends
suggest a diminished prospective return advantage for stocks over bonds. Regardless of the
future of the risk premium, sensible investors prepare for a future that differs from the past,
with diversification providing the most powerful protection against errors in forecasts of
expected asset class attributes.
Stock Prices and Inflation
Stocks tend to offer long-term protection against generalized price inflation. A simple, yet
elegant, means of understanding stock prices developed by Nobel laureate James Tobin
compares the replacement cost of corporate assets to the market value of those assets. In
equilibrium, Tobin argued that the ratio of replacement-cost-to-market value, which he named
"q" should equal one. If replacement cost exceeds market valuc, economic actors find it
cheaper to buy assets on the stock exchange than in the real economy. Conversely, if market
value exceeds replacement cost, economic actors generate profits by building companies and
floating shares on the stock exchange. Clearly, in rational markets, the value of corporate assets
on a stock exchange should equal the real world replacement cost of those selfsame assets.
To the extent that general price inflation increases the replacement cost of corporate assets,
that inflation should be reflected in increasing stock prices. If inflation did not result in higher
equity prices, the newly inflated replacement cost of assets would exceed market value, allowing
investors to purchase companies on the stock exchange at below intrinsic value. Until and
unless stock prices reflect price inflation, publicly traded companies represent bargain
basement merchandise.
In spite of the clear theoretical link between stock prices and inflation, the stock market
presents a mixed record on incorporating inflation into equity prices. The 1970s provide a
dramatic example of equity market failure to reflect rising price levels in stock prices. In 1973
and 1974, inflation croded purchasing power by 37 percent and stock prices decreased by a
total of 22 percent, hitting equity investors with a double whammy that caused losses of 51
percent in inflation-adjusted terms.
Jeremy Siegel observes that stock prices "provide excellent long-run hedges against inflation"
and weak short-term protection against rising prices. Presumably, the positive long-term
relationship between inflation and stock prices stems from rational behavior, as market
participants weigh the costs of acquiring assets in the real economy against the costs of
acquiring similar assets on the financial exchanges. Possibly, the negative short-term
relationship between inflation and stock prices results from irrational behavior, as investors
respond to unanticipated inflation by increasing the discount rate applied to future cash flows
without adjusting those future flows for the increases in inflation. While capital markets
history supports Siegel's observation, the difference in short-run and long-run responses by
equity prices to inflation creates a paradox. Because the long run consists of a series of short
runs, no theory explains both the poor short-term record and the strong long-term record of
stock price protection against price increases. In any event, investors seeking short-term shelter
from inflation need to look beyond holdings of marketable equities.
Alignment of Interests
Stocks exhibit a number of characteristics that tend to serve investor goals. The general
alignment of interests between corporate managers and shareholders bodes well for stock
investors. In most instances, company executives benefit from enhancing shareholder value,
serving the financial aspirations of management and investor alike. For example, corporate
managers often share in gains associated with greater corporate profitability, indirectly through
increased compensation and directly through increased values for personal shareholdings.
Unfortunately, the separation of ownership (by shareholders) and control (by management)
in publicly traded companies introduces agency problems that occur when managements (the
agents) benefit at the expense of shareholders (the principals). The most common wedge
between interests of shareholders and management stems from compensation arrangements for
management. High levels of salary and benefits accrue to management regardless of the level of
underlying company achievement. Because larger companies provide larger compensation
packages than smaller enterprises, corporate managers pursue corporate growth simply to
achieve higher levels of personal earnings regardless of the impact of corporate size on
enterprise profitability.
Managements divert funds to purposes that satisfy personal preferences at the expense of
corporate performance. Company art collections, business jets, lavish offices, and corporate
apartments confer benefits on senior managers at the expense of legitimate company goals.
Investors cringe upon reading stories regarding WorldCom chief executive Bernard Ebbers's
receipt of more than $400 million of personal loans from the company and Tyco chief
executive Dennis Kozlowski's diversion of $600 million of company assets for personal
purposes, including the purchase of a $6,000 shower curtain. Outsized financial and
nonfinancial rewards for management, whether legitimate or otherwise, come directly from the
pockets of company shareholders.
Yet, the most troubling scandal lies not with the chief executives that crossed the line, but
with those that feathered their beds while following the rules. Former General Electric chief
executive Jack Welch brought shame on himself and his company with a retirement package
filled with personal perquisites. Beginning with lifetime use of a $15 million apartment bought
by General Electric, the list includes access to the company's Boeing 737 jets, corporate
helicopters, and a car and driver for him and his wife. No doubt worried that the hundreds of
millions of dollars paid to Mr. Welch during his tenure at General Electric proved inadequate
to support his retirement, the company provided "wine, flowers, cook, housekeeper and other
amenities, including tickets to "top sporting events and the opera," to cater to the former
chief executive's needs.7 Even the reliably business-friendly editorial pages of the Wall Street
Journal characterized Mr. Welch's retirement package as "the playthings of corporate
opulence."8
The compensation excess exemplified by Ebbers, Kozlowski, and Welch represents the tip of
the iceberg. The deeper problem, as described by William McDonough, president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, lies in the fact that rapid increases in chief executive
compensation in the past two decades represent "terribly bad social policy and perhaps even
bad morals." McDonough suggested that corporate boards "should simply reach the
conclusion that corporate pay is excessive and adjust it to more reasonable and justifiable
levels."9
Stock Options
The use of stock options to reward corporate management produces a subtle disconnect
between the interests of management and shareholders. Options-based compensation schemes
work effectively when company share prices increase, as both management and shareholders
gain. The alignment of interests breaks down when share prices decrease, as management loses
only the opportunity to benefit from stock price increases. In fact, management fails to suffer
at all when corporate boards reset option prices to reflect the newly diminished stock price. In
sharp contrast to management's loss of a mere opportunity, when share prices decrease
shareholders lose cold, hard cash. Options-based compensation schemes represent a no-lose
game for management of publicly traded companics.
Microsoft provides a textbook example of using option grants to insulate employees from
share price declines. In April 2000, Chief Executive Steve Ballmer faced a problem of low
morale among employees concerned about the consequences of the Justice Department's
antitrust activity and a four-month, 44 percent stock price decline. To boost spirits, Ballmer
awarded more than 34,000 Microsoft employees stock options priced at the then current stock
price. The chief executive wrote in an email to employees that we know stock options are an
important part of our compensation. Even while asserting that preexisting options "will have
valuc long run," Ballmer expressed his hope that "these new grants will let people see returns
much sooner."10 By setting the option strike price near the stock's fifty-two week low, the
company effectively insulated employees from the dramatic decline in Microsoft's shares. The
company provided no such succor to shareholders.
In response to the all-too-numerous abuses of trust in the late 1990s, many corporations
began to review options-based compensation. In a particularly notable move, in July 2003,
Microsoft announced plans to climinate its options program and substitute a program of
restricted stock awards. Unlike the asymmetric option payoff, restricted stock produces a
congruence of outcomes in which management and shareholders profit and suffer together.
Chief Executive Steve Ballmer remarked, "whether it's dividend policy or how much risk to
take, it's always good to have the employees thinking as much like the shareholders as
possible. If substantial numbers of corporations follow Microsoft's lead, corporate
management will likely better serve shareholder interests in the future.
In spite of a general alignment of interests between shareholders and company managers,
too many abuses exist. Excessive executive compensation, whether in the direct form of inflated
salaries or the indirect form of unreasonable corporate perquisites, lines the pockets of
corporate managers at the expense of shareholders. Sometimes, as in the case of options-based
compensation, a disconnect exists between management and shareholders. One sure way to
reduce the conflict between the owners of shares and the managers of companies involves
ownership of stock by corporate management. Savvy investors seek companies with high levels
of insider ownership.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, the U.S. stock market boasted assets in excess of $18.2 trillion, making
it the largest liquid capital market in the world. More than 6,190 securities constituted the
market, as defined by the (misnamed) Wilshire 5000. The enormous size of the U.S. stock
market prompts many participants to divide the whole into any number of parts. Typical
categories include size of market capitalization (small, medium, and large), character of security
(growth or value), and nature of business (utility, technology, and health care, for example). At
year-end 2006, the U.S. stock market traded at a dividend yield of 1.7 percent, a price-carnings
ratio of 19.5 and a price-book ratio of 2.5.12
Summary
U.S. domestic equities represent the asset of choice for many long-term investors. Finance
theory predicts and practical experience demonstrates that stocks provide superior returns over
reasonably long holding periods. The general alignment of interests between shareholders and
management serves both the goals of outside owners and the aspirations of inside managers.
Holdings of equitics provide protection against inflation in the intermediate and long run.
Attractive characteristics of equity holdings arguc for a significant role in most portfolios.
Yet investors must guard against relying on equities to exhibit their general characteristics in
any specific time frame or allowing equities to account for too large a portion of the target
portfolio. History may overstate the attractiveness of U.S. stocks. Returns of bonds and cash
may exceed returns of stocks for years on end. For example, from the market peak in October
1929, it took stock investors fully twenty-one years and three months to match returns
generated by bond investors. 13 Alignment of interests between shareholders and management
breaks down with distressing frequency. Stock prices often fail to reflect underlying price
inflation, at times for extended periods. Although equity markets do not deliver returns in a
steady, stable, inflation-hedging fashion and corporate managements sometimes fail to serve
shareholder interests, equity investments remain a central part of thoughtfully assembled, long-
term-oriented investment portfolios.
U.S. TREASURY BONDS
Purchasers of U.S. Treasury bonds own a portion of the public debt of the United States
government. Holdings of government bonds play a prominent role in well-structured fixed
income portfolios, reflecting the attractive investment characteristics of full-faith-and-credit
obligations of the government and the significant volume of debt securities issued by the
government.
Because U.S. Treasury bonds enjoy the full-faith-and-credit backing of the U.S.
government, bondholders face no risk of default. Holders of government debt sleep secure in
the knowledge that interest and principal payments will be made in full and in a timely
manner. Lack of default risk does not, however, liberate bondholders from exposure to price
fluctuations. When interest rates risc, bond prices fall, as purchasers of existing assets need an
adjustment to reflect the now-higher rates available on newly issued debt. When interest rates
fall, bonds prices rise, as sellers of existing assets require greater compensation for their now-
more-attractive fixed stream of future payments. Of all risky investments, investors expect the
lowest returns from U.S. Treasury bonds, due to the high degree of security intrinsic in
obligations of the U.S. government.
Interest Rate Risk
Bonds confuse investors. The inverse relationship between interest rates and bond prices (rates
up, prices down and vice versa) proves central to understanding the role of fixed income in an
investment portfolio. Yet surveys show that a large majority of investors fail to grasp even the
most basic elements of bond math. Even highly respected market observers sometimes get it
wrong. An article in the New York Times business section ironically entitled "Better
Understanding of Bonds" asserted that "duration and bond prices move in lockstep with
interest rates. A bond with a duration of seven years would gain 7 percent of its price when
interest rates moved up one percentage point. The same bond would lose 7 percent when rates
moved down that amount."14 Of course, the Times described the relationship between prices
and yields in perfectly perverse prose. Increases in interest rates cause price declines, not price
increases. If a highly regarded, financially sophisticated New York Times business reporter
cannot get it right, what chance does an ordinary investor have?
Duration measures the effective maturity of a bond, considering the timing and present
value of individual cash flows received over the term of the instrument. V Longer duration
bonds exhibit greater sensitivity to interest rate changes than do shorter duration bonds. By
increasing a portfolio's duration, investors gain greater exposure to interest rate moves, creating
a roughly equivalent choice between more assets with lower duration and fewer assets with
higher duration. Portfolio managers wishing to reduce the opportunity costs of holding fixed
income assets might rely on a small allocation to a long duration portfolio, in essence buying
the diversifying power of bonds on the cheap.
In the realm of U.S. Treasury bond investing, risk relates primarily to time horizon. An
investor with a six-month time horizon finds six-month Treasury bills riskless, as no doubt
exists about the timely payment of the face value of the bill at maturity. That same six-month-
time-horizon investor finds ten-year Treasury notes quite risky. As interest rates change, the
value of the note might vary materially, even over a six-month holding period. An increase in
rates leaves the investor with a loss, while a decline in rates provides the investor with an
unexpected windfall.
Similarly, an investor with a ten-year time horizon faces significant risk with six-month
Treasury bill investments. The six-month bills must be rolled over nineteen times to generate a
ten-year holding period return. At the outset, the investor knows the rate only on the first six-
month bill. The nineteen future rollover rates hold considerable uncertainty. Unless investors
match holding period with maturity, price changes or rate changes may cause returns to diverge
from expected levels.
Diversifying Power
U.S. Treasury securities provide a unique form of diversification for investor portfolios,
protecting against financial crisis and economic distress. In the stock market collapse of
October 1987, when the U.S. stock market plummeted more than 20 percent in a single day,
investors sought the safe haven of U.S. Treasury obligations. Even as stock prices fell off of a
cliff, Treasury bonds staged an impressive rally. During the economic distress surrounding the
confluence of the 1998 Asian, Russian, and American capital markets crises, investors engaged
in a "flight to quality," favoring the security of U.S. Treasury obligations. Similarly, amid the
credit crunch of August 2007, Treasury bill yields dropped two full percentage points in a
matter of days to an intraday low of 2.5 percent. At that time, the spread between LIBOR and
Treasury bills amounted to a stunning three percentage points, fully four times the average
spread that prevailed for the month of June 2007. In times of crisis, government securities
provide the greatest degree of protection to investor portfolios.
The protection to portfolio values provided by government bonds comes at a high price.
Expected returns for fixed income instruments fall short of expected returns for equity-
oriented investments. Some investors attempt to mitigate the opportunity costs of owning
government bonds by holding higher-yielding corporate paper. Unfortunately,
nongovernment bonds exhibit characteristics such as credit risk, illiquidity, and optionality
that reduce effectiveness as a hedge against financial distress. The purity of noncallable, long-
term, default-free Treasury bonds provides the most powerful diversification to investor
portfolios.
Panic of 1998
In the summer and early fall of 1998, the Asian financial crisis painted a bleak backdrop for
securities markets. A mid-July slump in cquity markets accelerated in August when
devaluation and default in Russia contributed to investor anxiety. The near collapse in
September of the insanely levered Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund fueled bearish
sentiment, causing market participants to demand immediate liquidity and safety.
During the worldwide collapse in equity prices, as shown in Figure 7.1, the broad-based
Wilshire 5000 declined 22 percent from its all time peak on July 17th to the market bottom on
October 8th. Reflecting a strong preference for quality and size, large-capitalization stocks
outperformed small securities in dramatic fashion with the S&P 500 outpacing the Russell
2000 by a margin of 14 percent, or-19 percent to -33 percent. Developed foreign and emerging
equity returns provided little solace for diversified portfolios, with the markets falling 21
percent and 27 percent, respectively.
Amid the market tumult, long-term Treasuries posted solid gains, returning 8 percent and
besting the results of every major asset class. Credit risk and optionality dampened the
performance of high quality corporate bonds and mortgages, limiting returns to 5 percent and
2 percent, respectively. Junk bonds and emerging debt produced losses, reflecting the high
degree of equity exposure implicit in risky bond positions. High yield posted a-7 percent
return and emerging markets generated a dismal -24 percent result over the period.
Asset class performance surrounding the 1998 market panic illustrates the superior
diversifying power of pure fixed income-long-term, noncallable, default-free. Under normal
circumstances, credit exposure and option risk increase returns; in times of crisis, U.S. Treasury
bonds provide the protection that investors require.
Figure 7.1 Treasury Bonds Protect Portfolios in Turbulent Markets
Various Asset Class Returns, July 17, 1998 to October 8, 1998
Bond Prices and Inflation
To add a further measure of complexity to the world of bond investing, investors in traditional
U.S. Treasury bonds observe only nominal returns. In some instances, investors care primarily
about nominal returns. For example, if a debtor desires to pay off a fixed obligation, the debtor
requires only the amount of the debt, nothing more and nothing less. Nominally denominated
investments, like Treasury bonds, match nominal liabilities nicely. If, on the other hand, an
institution hopes to maintain the purchasing power of endowment assets, that institution
needs to keep pace with inflation. Inflation-sensitive investments, unlike Treasury bonds, fulfill
inflation-sensitive requirements. For holders of traditional Treasury debt securities, changes in
inflation rates influence after-inflation returns in unpredictable ways, leading to potential
variation between anticipated and actual outcomes.
Investors price fixed income instruments to generate positive inflation-adjusted rates of
return. When the inflation rates experienced by investors more or less match the expectations
formed at the beginning of the holding period, bondholders receive the anticipated after-
inflation return. When inflation rates exceed expectations, the unanticipated inflation crodes
the purchasing power of the promised stream of fixed payments, causing investors to receive
disappointing after-inflation returns. When inflation rates fall short of expectations, the lower
rate of general price inflation provides investors with a purchasing power boost. Deviations
between original inflationary expectations and actual experience contain the potential to cause
dramatic changes in real returns for fixed income investors.
When inflationary expectations fail to match actual experience, bonds tend to behave
differently from other financial assets. Unanticipated inflation crushes bonds, while ultimately
benefiting equities. Unanticipated deflation boosts bonds, while undermining stocks. Bonds
provide the greatest diversification relative to equities in cases where actual inflation differs
dramatically from expected levels.
Alignment of Interests
Interests of Treasury bond investors and the U.S. government prove to be better aligned than
interests of corporate bond investors and corporate issuers. The government sees little reason
to disfavor bondholders. In essence, action taken to reduce the value of government bonds
represents a transfer from bondholders to non-bondholders. In fact, if all debt were held
domestically, advantages or disadvantages accruing to the government from changes in bond
values would balance equal-and-offsetting disadvantages or advantages accruing to
bondholders, leading to transfers from one group of citizens (taxpayers or bondholders) to
another group of citizens (bondholders or taxpayers). Moreover, were the government to
disadvantage bond investors, future access to credit markets might be impaired. Worry over
misalignment of interests causes little lost sleep for owners of Treasury bonds.
Investors in Treasury bonds generally perceive the government as a neutral player in the debt
management process. Unlike corporate debtholders, who sit squarely across the table from the
issuers of corporate obligations, government bondholders expect fair treatment. Consider the
fact that from 1975 to 1984, the U.S. Treasury offered a dozen issues of thirty-year bonds that
contained call provisions for the final five years of the issue's life. A call provision allows the
debt issuer to redeem a debt issue at a fixed price. Economically motivated issuers exercise call
provisions only when the fixed-call price stands below the value of the bond calculated in
absence of a call provision. Exercise of a call provision eliminates debt with high coupons
relative to current market levels, benefiting the issuer and hurting the investor.
Because of the special nature of the government's role in debt markets, bond market
participants debated whether the government would employ the call option for debt
management purposes or for economic refundings. If the government used the call option for
debt management, then bondholders faced an idiosyncratic risk as likely to provide a benefit as
a cost. If the government used the call option for economic refundings, then bondholders faced
a risk of economic loss.
Government bondholders received the answer to the question of how the Treasury would
behave on January 14, 2000 when the Treasury "announced the call for redemption at par on
May 15, 2000 of the 8-1/4% Treasury Bonds of 2000-05."15 The government responded to
economic incentives, calling high-interest debt to reduce financing charges.
In later refundings, the U.S. Treasury explicitly cited an economic motivation for calling
bonds. In the unimaginatively titled January 15, 2004 Public Debt News release, "Treasury Calls
9-1/8 Percent Bonds of 2004-09," the government noted that "these bonds are being called to
reduce the cost of debt financing. The 9-1/8 percent interest rate is significantly above the
current cost of securing financing for the five years remaining to their maturity. In current
market conditions, Treasury estimates that interest savings from the call and refinancing will be
about $544 million."16 In other words, the ability to refinance the 9-percent-plus-coupon
bonds at an interest cost of between 3 percent and 4 percent resulted in substantial interest
savings for the government.
Even though the government acted in an economic fashion by exercising the call provision
on the 9-1/8s Treasury bonds of 2004-09, the fact that investors debated whether the
government would exercise the call provision to generate interest savings signifies the unusual
relationship between the government and its creditors. In fact, the program of callable Treasury
issuance lasted a mere ten years and involved a relatively small portion of overall government
bond issuance. Moreover, the call provisions affected only the last five years of the thirty-year
bond's life, in contrast to the much more aggressive call provisions typically included in issues
of long-term corporate debt. Perhaps the U.S. Treasury stopped selling callable bonds to
improve the character of securities offered to government bond market participants. In any
event, of all debt issuers, the government promotes the greatest alignment of interests with its
creditors.
At December 31, 2006, roughly 31 percent of U.S. government bond issues represented
debt issued by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). (The Government National
Mortgage Association, known as "Ginnic Mac," the Federal Home Loan and Mortgage
Corporation, known as "Freddie Mac," and the Federal National Mortgage Association,
known as "Fannic Mac," constitute the largest GSEs.) Many market participants treat debt
issued by GSEs as close substitutes for U.S. Treasury obligations. In fact, credit quality of GSES
ranges from the full-faith-and-credit status enjoyed by Ginnie Mac to the less exalted status of
Fannie Mac and Freddie Mac. Many GSEs operate in a nether land between the certainty of
government guarantees and the uncertainty of corporate promises to pay. While chances of
default by GSEs seem quite low to most market observers, many GSE obligations contain
options that may disadvantage bondholders.
Investors seeking the purity of U.S. Treasury debt face a surprisingly daunting task. Many
high quality bond investment vehicles hold large quantities of GSE debt, as fund managers
pursue the time-honored investment practice of hoping to get something for nothing in the
form of incremental yield on GSE paper (the something) without exposing the portfolio to
additional risk (the nothing). The twin possibilitics of credit deterioration and exercise of
options by the GSEs carry the potential to harm bondholder interests. Investors secking high
quality fixed income exposure avoid GSE debt and opt for the purity of U.S. Treasury bonds,
the full-faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S. government.
Cash
Investors frequently divide fixed income assets into cash and bonds, with the former consisting
of instruments maturing within one year, and the latter including instruments with more than
a year to maturity. For investors with short investment horizons, cash represents the riskless
asset as market participants know nominal and real returns with reasonable certainty. Certainty
of return comes with a high price as returns over the eighty-one years through December 31,
2006 amount to a mere 3.7 percent per annum for cash, which falls to a paltry 0.7 percent per
year after adjustment for inflation.
Because investors frequently employ one-year horizons when conducting portfolio analysis,
cash naturally enters the matrix of capital markets returns, causing many long-term investors to
misidentify cash holdings as a riskless asset. If investors conducted analysis over periods
consistent with an appropriate investment horizon, cash would appear as a substantially riskier
asset.
Some investors argue that cash provides necessary liquidity for endowment funds, ignoring
the massive amounts of liquidity resident in institutional portfolios. Interest income, dividend
payments, and rental streams provide liquid cash flows, facilitating the ability of the investment
fund to meet spending distribution requirements. Natural turnover of assets provides another
source of funds. Bonds mature, companies merge, and private assets become liquid, serving as
sources of cash flow. Manager sell decisions create yet another set of liquidity events. Finally, if
income flows, natural asset turnover and manager sales create insufficient liquidity to meet
spending requirements, investors retain the ability to direct sales of assets to provide for current
consumption. The modest transactions costs incurred in selling assets pale in comparison to
the drag on returns created by holding cash as a standard part of an institutional portfolio.
Based on delivery of poor real returns and failure to serve as a riskless asset for long-term
investors, cash plays no significant role in a well-constructed endowment portfolio.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, U.S. government bonds totaled $3.2 trillion, of which $2.2 trillion
represented full-faith-and-credit obligations of the U.S. Treasury and $1.0 trillion represented
debt of government sponsored enterprises. U.S. Treasury bonds trade in the deepest, most
efficient market in the world.
The universe of Treasury bonds sported a yield to maturityVI of 4.9 percent at year-end
2006 with an average maturity of 6.9 years and a duration of 5.0 years. Agency issues promised
a yield of 5.1 percent with a 5.1-year average maturity and 3.5-year duration.
Summary
U.S. Treasury bonds provide a unique form of portfolio diversification, serving as a hedge
against financial accidents and unanticipated deflation. No other asset type comes close to
matching the diversifying power created by long-term, noncallable, default-free, full-faith-and-
credit obligations of the U.S. government.
Investors pay a price for the diversifying power of Treasury bonds. The ironclad security of
Treasury debt causes investors to expect (and deserve) low returns relative to those expected
from riskier assets. While holders of long-term Treasury bonds stand to benefit from declining
price inflation, in an environment of unanticipated inflation Treasury bondholders lose.
Treasury bonds' modest expected returns and adverse reaction to inflation argue for modest
allocations to the asset class by long-term investors.
FOREIGN DEVELOPED EQUITY
Investments in developed economy equity markets provide the same expected returns as U.S.
equity investments. But overseas investments exhibit two critical differentiating characteristics
relative to domestic holdings. First, markets in different regions respond to different economic
forces, causing returns to behave differently from one region of the world to the next. Second,
investment in non-U.S. markets exposes investors to foreign currency fluctuations, adding
another variable to the investment equation.
Developed economy equity markets share similar levels of expected return. Comparability
in economic infrastructure, commonality in drivers of economic performance, and secular
liberalization in flows of labor, goods, and services across national boundaries combine to cause
investors to expect similar long-run results from investments in developed equity markets.
Although investor enthusiasm for individual countries waxes and wanes along with strong or
weak recent market performance, over reasonably long periods of time, investors might expect
the developed markets in North America, Europe, and Asia to produce roughly comparable
returns.
In fact, in the thirty-seven years since the 1970 inception of the Morgan Stanley Capital
International (MSCI) Europe, Australasia and Far East (EAFE) Index that tracks non-U.S.
equity market performance, EAFE countries generated 10.8 percent per annum returns relative
to 11.2 percent per annum returns for the U.S. dominated S&P 500 Index. While the domestic
and international results fall in the same neighborhood, the United States enjoys a slight
margin of superiority. Because such market performance comparisons exhibit a high degree of
sensitivity to beginning and ending dates, the most reasonable conclusion supports the
assumption of approximate equivalence between expected returns for domestic and
international equitics.
Diversifying Power
The lack of correlation between foreign markets and the U.S. market provides valuable
diversification to investors. Some observers speculate that the process of global economic
integration has caused individual country equity markets to behave increasingly one like the
other, leading to less prospective diversification. As evidence of increasing correlation between
markets, diversification skeptics point to the behavior of equity markets in the crash of 1987
and in the financial dislocations during the crisis of 1998. In both instances, stock markets
worldwide exhibited similar, extraordinary declines. Yet, market declines in 1987 and 1998
constituted short-term events in which market players expressed extreme preferences for
liquidity and quality. After brief periods during which many developed equity markets moved
in concert, individual country markets reverted to fluctuation in response to country-specific
drivers of local market performance.
Consider the relative returns of equity markets in the United States and Japan. In the 1980s,
Japan dominated all other world stock markets, returning 28.4 percent per annum versus 16.5
percent per annum for other non-U.S. markets and 17.4 percent per annum for the U.S. equity
markets. Near the end of the extraordinary bull run in Japanese stocks, Japan boasted the
largest market capitalization in the world, surpassing even the massive U.S. market in size.
In the 1990s, Japan's fortunes reversed. During the last decade of the twentieth century,
Japan's economy collapsed, contributing to a market decline of 0.9 percent per annum for the
decade. In contrast, other non-U.S. markets returned 13.5 percent per annum and the United
States market produced an astonishing 18.2 percent return per annum. As Japan's stock
market declined, the country lost its dominant equity market position, falling so far behind the
United States that at one point Japan's cquity market capitalization amounted to less than one-
fifth of the U.S.'s market capitalization. Clearly, investments in individual equity markets
behave differently, generating returns that differ one from the other, thereby providing
diversification to portfolio holdings.
Foreign Currency Exposure
Investors in foreign equities assume foreign exchange risk as an unavoidable part of overseas
equity exposure. Realistic investors expect foreign currency translation neither to add to nor to
subtract from investment results. Even though much ink spills and many trees fall in the service
of market prognosticators who fill reams of pages in attempts to divine the future of foreign
exchange rates, no one really knows where currencies will go. Sensible investors avoid
speculating on currencies.
Some observers suggest that holders of foreign cquities should routinely hedge foreign
exchange exposure. Unfortunately, hedges prove difficult to fashion as foreign equity managers
face uncertain holding periods and unknowable future position sizes, creating issues regarding
the appropriate term and magnitude of the hedge. As a result, foreign equity investors
necessarily assume at least some foreign exchange risk along with commitments to the asset
class.
Fortunately, finance theorists conclude that some measure of foreign exchange exposure
adds to portfolio diversification. Unless foreign currency positions constitute more than 20
percent or 25 percent of portfolio assets, currency exposure serves to reduce overall portfolio
risk. Beyond 20 percent to 25 percent of portfolio assets, the currency exposure constitutes a
source of incremental risk, suggesting consideration of some corrective action.
Performance Chasing
Investors tend to seek diversification when the core portfolio asset disappoints, either in
absolute or in relative terms. For instance, from 1998 to 2003, a period during which foreign
markets underperformed, returning a cumulative -18.5 percent relative to a cumulative -6.4
percent for the broad U.S. market, college endowments maintained a relatively stable allocation
to non-U.S. equities. The fact that foreign stock allocations fell in a narrow range of between
12.5 percent and 13.8 percent for the period indicates that investors were engaged in rational
rebalancing activity. In contrast to the rational rebalancing in the face of poor relative
performance, as foreign markets took off in 2004, allocations to foreign equitics took off, too.
In the three years from 2004 to 2006, non-U.S. equitics posted returns of 23.9 percent per
annum and emerging markets generated returns of 35.8 percent per annum, completely
dominating the U.S. market returns of 13.1 percent per annum. In response, college
endowment managers chased performance, boosting foreign equity allocations from 13.8
percent in 2003 to 15.6 percent in 2004 to 17.4 percent in 2005 and finally to 20.1 percent in
2006. Momentum strategies generally end badly.
Strong relative performance of foreign equities caused endowment managers to
dramatically increase non-U.S. equity holdings, with investors frequently citing diversification
as the rationale for boosting foreign allocations. Disappointing performance from the
diversifying asset may cause investors to reduce allocations at an inopportune time. Sensible
investors pursue diversification as a policy to reduce risk, not as a tactic to chase performance.
By following a disciplined policy of maintaining a well-diversified set of portfolio exposures,
regardless of market zigs and zags, investors establish the conditions for long-run success. In
fact, when taking market conditions into account, investors increase the odds of success by
diversifying into asset classes after they suffer poor performance. In any case, foreign equitics
provide an important tool for reducing portfolio risk without sacrificing expected returns.
Foreign Equity Prices and Inflation
Investors in domestic equities face an inflationary paradox-stocks appear to provide good
long-term protection against inflation, while they seem to offer poor short-term protection.
Foreign stock investors encounter no such conundrum. The tenuous link between (2)
domestic inflation and (b) the returns of foreign stocks translated into dollars proves so remote
as to render foreign equities useless as a hedge against inflation.
Alignment of Interests
As a first approximation, alignment of interests between U.S. investors and foreign
corporations resembles the relationship between U.S. investors and U.S. corporations.
Generally speaking, both domestically and overseas, equity investors expect corporate
management to look after shareholder interests.
Even though the corporate scandals at Enron and WorldCom, among others, highlighted
the shortcomings of American corporate governance, the fact remains that in the United States
a strong coincidence of interest exists between shareholders and management. As a broad
generalization, elsewhere in the world corporate managements focus less single-mindedly on
profit generation. In some countries, cultural norms lead to greater concern for the needs of
other stakeholders, including workers, lenders, and the broader community. In other countries,
poor governance structures allow controlling shareholders to divert resources from minority
shareholders. While a lesser coincidence of interests between overseas managements and their
shareholders constitutes a disadvantage to owners of foreign shares, the advantages of
increasing the investment opportunity set argue for inclusion of nonU.S. securities in
individual investor portfolios.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, developed foreign markets totaled $23.8 trillion, as measured by
Morgan Stanley Capital International. The sum of the twenty-two countries included by
MSCI in the non-U.S. developed world exceeded the market capitalization of the U.S. market,
which stood at $18.2 trillion as of year-end 2006. Japan led the non-U.S. world with $5.0
trillion in assets. Other large markets include the United Kingdom ($3.8 trillion), France ($2.4
trillion), Canada ($1.8 trillion), and Germany ($1.6 trillion). Europe accounted for 63 percent
of the non-U.S. world, Asia for 26 percent, Canada for 7 percent and Australia/New Zealand
for 5 percent.
Overall, foreign developed equity markets sported a dividend yield of 2.4 percent, a price-
carnings ratio of 16.0, and a price-book ratio of 27. Regional variations matter. Europe yielded
27 percent at year-end 2006 relative to 1.1 percent for Japan, while European securities posted
a price-earnings ratio of 14.5 and a price-book ratio of 2.6 relative to respective ratios of 21.2
and 2.1 for Japan.
Summary
Since expected returns from foreign developed markets roughly approximate expected returns
from U.S. markets, investors establish positions in foreign developed equity markets primarily
to provide portfolio diversification. The most important source of diversification stems from
the fact that forces driving returns in equity markets outside of the United States differ from
forces driving returns in the United States. Foreign currency exposure adds a further measure
of diversification to investor portfolios.
Sensible investors invest in foreign equity markets through thick and thin, regardless of
recent past performance. All too often, market players seek the diversification promised by
foreign stocks following a period of strong relative foreign market returns. When the
diversifying strategies fail to produce returns superior to domestic market results, investors
abandon the disappointing diversifying assets. Performance-chasing players use international
equities to whipsaw portfolios, locking in poor relative returns and damaging investment
results.
EMERGING MARKETS EQUITY
Emerging markets represent a high-risk, high-expected-return segment of the marketable
equities universe. Defined as a group of countries with economies in an intermediate stage of
development, neither undeveloped nor developed, emerging markets present a formidable
array of fundamental risks for investors. On a macro level, investors concern themselves with
the development of the overall economy and the maturation of the securities markets
infrastructure. On a micro level, investors worry about quality of management and profit
orientation of nascent enterprises.
Market observers frequently confuse strong economic growth with strong equity market
prospects. Consider the extreme case of a command economy with resource allocation rules
that operate without the benefit of securities markets. Clearly, economic growth occurs
without any impact on stock prices, as equity securities do not exist. In the less extreme case of
market-oriented economies with poor resource allocation, providers of equity capital might
receive consistently poor returns. Corporate revenues may accrue disproportionately to
corporate management (through salaries), to labor (through wages), or to government entities
(through taxes), leaving inadequate recompense for capital. In well-functioning economics,
prices and returns adjust to reflect financial market conditions. Not all emerging market
economics function well. Profitable equity market investments require profitable enterprises,
for investors ultimately share in corporate earnings. Therein lies the primary microeconomic
risk for emerging market investors. In emerging markets, as elsewhere, economic growth may
not lead to corporate profitabil which in turn translates i stock market success.
Economic history contains many examples of emerging markets that submerged. In an
article dramatically entitled "Survival," Stephen Brown, William Goetzmann, and Stephen
Ross identify thirty-six stock exchanges operating at the beginning of the twentieth century. Of
the thirty-six, "more than half suffered at least one major hiatus in trading... usually due to
nationalizations or war." More distressingly to investors who believe in the inevitability of
progress, of the thirty-six markets that operated in 1900, fully fifteen remained classified as
emerging markets more than 100 years later. One market, located in Serbia's Belgrade, fails
even to make the twenty-first century list of emerging markets. The authors dryly note that "in
fact, the very term 'emerging markets' admits the possibility that these markets might fail."17
In recent years, investors enjoyed the opportunity to invest in an ever-expanding set of
developing markets. Morgan Stanley Capital International, the leading constructor of non-
U.S. market indices, began tracking emerging markets in 1988 with an index of eight countries
ranging from Mexico to Jordan to Thailand. Five years later, the population stood at nineteen
with notable additions of India, Korca, and Portugal. By 1998, the total reached twenty-eight
as South Africa, Russia, and a number of central European countries joined MSCI's coverage
universe. In 2001, Egypt and Morocco joined the index, while Sri Lanka departed. Because of
investment restrictions and lack of liquidity, Venezuela left the index in 2006, bringing the
emerging market country population to twenty-five.
On occasion, countries move out of the emerging world to the developed world. In 1997
Portugal made the leap, and in 2001 Greece followed. As emerging economies make progress,
more countries will advance to the ranks of the developed world.
The Bull Case for Emerging Markets
Antoine van Agtmael, longtime investor in emerging markets, articulates a bullish perspective
on emerging markets in his excellent book, The Emerging Markets Century.
As we enter the Emerging Markets Century, the time has come to rethink what we mean
by "risk." Gazing back in the rearview mirror, we once regarded emerging markets as
crisis-prone, volatile, desperately poor, small in the global economy to the point of
irrelevancy, dependent on Western consumer markets, and heavily protected. Stock
markets were poorly regulated and prone to manipulation; a lack of participation by
institutional investors and pension funds left much room for speculation and insider
trading; corporate disclosure was notoriously poor.
More developed markets, in contrast, led in economic stability, technology, market
size, and transparency. A better legal framework and corporate governance protected
investors while domestic pension funds and a large mutual funds industry were ready
buyers of stocks and bonds. And, of course, a huge gap remained in the size,
sophistication, and quality of companies between the West and "the Rest."
lay, the case for emerging market investing is different precisely because (1) these
markets themselves are less different and more global than before and (2) a growing
number of companies are becoming world-class. While emerging markets were until
fairly recently regarded as a small yet risky niche, the increasing importance of these
countries and the importance of these companies has propelled emerging markets from
being the spice of an investment portfolio to a more central role that is more mainstream
and less of a gamble. The practical implications of this broad-based shift both in real and
perceived risk are that emerging markets should be a core component of investors
portfolios rather than an afterthought but that they will also be less exciting going
forward, 18
While Antoine van Agtmacl's work supports the role of emerging markets equities as a core
asset class, their relatively immature regulatory environments argue for special care on the part
of investment managers. Emerging markets may be "less exciting going forward," but they will
continue to be exciting.
Emerging Market Equity Prices and Inflation
The link between inflation in the United States and emerging market stock returns suffers from
the same issues as the link between U.S. inflation and foreign developed stock returns. That
said, basic commodities play an important role in a number of emerging markets economies.
To the extent that the U.S. suffers commodity-price-induced inflationary pressures,
investments in emerging markets stocks may provide partial protection against the inflation.
Alignment of Interests
Development of market infrastructure in emerging economics proceeds in fits and starts as
legislators, regulators, and corporate managements learn the rules of the game. Investors
accustomed to the protections afforded in the United States find most emerging markets quite
inhospitable. Quality of securities legislation ranges from poor to good, enforcement of
regulations varies from inadequate to adequate, and fidelity of managements to shareholders'
interests falls all over the lot. Caveat emptor.
Government policies sometimes interfere with investor interests, occasionally in dramatic
fashion. In 1998, during the Asian crisis, Malaysia restricted the convertibility of the ringgit,
effectively prohibiting foreign investors from repatriating funds. Because of bad behavior
regarding capital controls, MSCI removed Malaysia from one of the firm's emerging market
indices. Not until Malaysia removed capital controls in late 1999 did the country reestablish its
credentials as a full-fledged member of the MSCI roster.
In emerging markets, corporate actions resemble, at times, the Wild West. One market
observer suggested that Russian equity investors put money in enterprises where management
attempts grand theft and avoid commitments to companies where management engages in
petty larceny. The rationale for the superficially contradictory advice lay in the notion that
managements of truly valuable enterprises attempted to steal the entire entity, while
managements of less valuable enterprises simply sought to pilfer small pieces.
The inferior alignment of interests facing investors in emerging markets represents one of
the critical risk factors that cause investors to demand higher rates of return for emerging
markets equity investments. Since investors operate in an environment with less-evolved
frameworks for the definition and resolution of legal and regulatory issues, the resulting
uncertainty forces sensible investors to seek premium returns.
Emerging markets governments occasionally drive wedges between the interests of
shareholders and managements. Controls on the ownership and voting rights of local shares
sometimes lead to the creation of two classes of share owners, with attendant problems for the
second-class foreign investor. Capital controls, although infrequently imposed, interfere with
the ability of foreign investors to transfer funds freely. Government regulation in the emerging
markets contains the potential to harm foreign investor interests.
In other instances, corporate managements fail to act in shareholder interests. A particularly
prevalent problem in many Asian countries involves family-controlled companies satisfying
family desires at the expense of external minority shareholder wishes. An absence of
transparency compounds the problem as outside investors often lack the information required
to identify and address insider-dealing issues.
As emerging markets mature and as global capital markets liberalize, structural problems
with misalignment of interests become less severe. Nonetheless, rational investors require a
substantial return premium to expose assets to companies that operate in the less-than-ideal
emerging markets legal and regulatory framework.
Market Characteristics
At December 31, 2006, emerging markets equities totaled $7.2 trillion according to MSCI.
Ranging from India ($824 billion) and China ($816 billion), which by market-capitalization
would rank in the middle of the developed market cohort, to the much smaller markets of Peru
($38 billion) and Jordan ($30 billion), the emerging markets universe encompasses a broad
range of countries. Asia accounts for 53 percent of emerging market equity assets, Latin
America for 20 percent, Europe for 16 percent, and Africa and the Middle East for 12 percent.
Emerging market valuations trumped those of the United States at year-end 2006 (at least
for investors seeking valuc). The emerging markets dividend yield amounted to 2.1 percent
relative to 1.7 percent for the United States. The price-earnings ratio stood at 15.6,
representing a substantial discount to the U.S. market level of 19.5. Emerging markets traded
at a price-book ratio of 2.5, identical to the U.S. level.
Summary
Investors in emerging markets equities require substantial expected returns to compensate for
the high level of fundamental investment risk. During the period for which good data exist,
investors received inadequate compensation for risks incurred. From 1985, when the World
Bank's International Finance Corporation began measuring emerging markets equity returns,
to December 2006, emerging markets equities produced 12.0 percent per annum returns (as
measured by the IFC Global Composite) relative to 13.1 percent for the S&P 500 and 12.4
percent for EAFE. The deficit relative to developed market returns indicates that emerging
market investors accepted higher fundamental risks than developed market investors without
earning excess returns. Investors in emerging markets hope the future treats them better than
the past.
Because of macroeconomic and microeconomic concerns, emerging markets equities
promise high expected returns with commensurately high levels of risk. An allocation to
emerging markets stocks contains the potential to enhance the risk and return characteristics of
well-structured investment portfolios.
CONCLUSION
Investors find a number of essential components of a well-diversified, equity-oriented portfolio
in the traditional asset classes of domestic equity, U.S. Treasury bonds, foreign developed
market equity, and foreign emerging market equity. Domestic and foreign equities drive
portfolio returns, while Treasury bonds provide diversifying power. By employing traditional
asset classes in a well-diversified portfolio, investors build a strong foundation for investment
success.
In the course of providing basic, valuable, differentiable characteristics to investor
portfolios, traditional asset classes rely on market-generated returns. By investing in asset classes
in which market forces drive returns, investors achieve a high level of confidence that the
various asset classes will produce the expected long-term results, dramatically reducing the risk
of active-management slippage between hoped-for asset class performance and actual
outcomes.
Traditional asset classes trade in broad, deep, investable markets, ensuring substantial levels
of commitment by a range of Wall Street firms. The resulting competition leads to market
transparency and efficiency, increasing the likelihood that investors transact on fair terms.
Investors without active management expertise rely primarily on traditional asset classes for
portfolio construction, perhaps, adding exposure to Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
and an index of real estate investment trusts to round out the portfolio. Investors with active
management expertise not only enjoy the possibility of producing market-beating returns for
domestic and foreign equitics, but also benefit from the inclusion of asset classes that depend
on active management, including absolute return, real assets, and private equity.
1. The 203-year history reflects the 200 years of data in Siegel's Stocks for the Lang Ran, grown by the three years of
subsequent returns in Ibbotson's data set.
II. See pages 55-58 for Ibbotson's and Siegel's stock and bond return data.
III. A price earnings ratio measures valuation by comparing a company's stock price per share to its earnings per share.
IV. price book ratio measures valuation by comparing a company's stock price per share to its book value (assets minus
liabilities) per share.
V. The term duration was first used in 1938 by Macaulay, who developed a formula to measure the average economic
life of a security. Duration constitutes a weighted average of the proportions of the present value of the expected cash
flows from a bond, with each payment weighted by the period in which the payment is expected to be received.
VI. Yield to maturity represents the rate of return anticipated by holding a bond to its maturity date.